China ’ s crackdown on cryptocurrency trading – a sign of things to come September 20 , 2017 8.26am. The University of Melbourne Author DIRECTOR OF STUDIES , BANKING AND FINANCE LAW , The University of Melbourne Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations. View the full list. The decision to order several Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies exchanges to close shows how much they are perceived to establish financial stability and social order in China . The decision to also ban initial coin offerings altogether ( the unregulated means by which funds are raised for a new cryptocurrency venture ) has taken traders and analysts by surprise . China is the world ’ s cryptocurrency market with around 80 % of Bitcoin transactions taking place in yuan . The ( a digital ledger in which digital currency transactions are publicly recorded ) is poised to have a on the future of finance . This recent crackdown suggests the Chinese government is determined to cement its place as a leading rule maker and power-broker in the quickly emerging area of cryptocurrency transactions and exchange . Chinese relationship with bitcoin The Chinese government released a of 60 initial coin offering trading platforms and instructed local agencies to make sure all platforms were listed and closed down . The delayed crackdown is in line with previous practice in China . The Chinese government often adopts a wait-and-see approach to activities that are largely unregulated until the magnitude of the activity becomes clear . The extent of speculative investment and the risk of losses to investors if the bubble bursts motivated the government to intervene in cryptocurrency trading . Read more : In China , the popularity of cryptocurrencies has been boosted by the of controls on money moving out of the country over the past two years . This has lowered the value of the China ’ s currency , the renminbi , as investors seek assets in different denominations and chase higher yields . Cryptocurrencies are also popular because they can be used to transfer funds offshore and circumvent foreign exchange controls . The government is with the of cryptocurrencies and initial coin offerings to perpetrate and disguise fraudulent activity , including money laundering and ponzi type investment schemes . Chinese authorities are anxious to avoid any social unrest in the lead-up to the 19th Party Congress . The effects of the , where the A-share market lost one-third of its value over a period of one month , are still being felt . In some respects , the regulatory intervention in China is mirrored in other countries that have been dragging their heels in coming to terms with cryptocurrencies . It was only in July this year that the US Securities Commission issued a determining that DAO tokens were “ securities ” and must be regulated accordingly . China ’ s own cryptocurrency In January last year , the People ’ s Bank of China issued a notice announcing it would be issuing its own of the renminbi . The notice highlighted the benefits of a government backed digital currency in terms of cost , coverage , convenience and security . Read more : In the initial phase , it ’ s likely that trading in this digital currency will be limited to regulated entities such as banks along similar lines to trading on the conventional foreign exchange markets . By launching its own digital currency , the Chinese government avoids the risks associated with privately-issued cryptocurrencies and ensuring they are not used as a means of circumventing China ’ s strict capital and currency controls . When China introduces its own digital currency ( no formal date has yet been announced ) , the impact on the global economy will be significant . Not only will it challenge the existing global payment systems and establish China as a leading rule maker in this area , it will also enhance the importance of the renminbi as a global reserve currency .Can cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin survive scrutiny from central banks ? September 19 , 2017 1.50pm BST University of Reading Author Associate Professor , University of Reading Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The future of money looks very different in the world of cryptocurrencies . There is a growing consensus among businesses , investors and countries ( ) that these alternative forms of online money are going to dominate payments in the next decade . There may be agreement on the potential , but quite how regulators and central banks will respond is still up in the air . The combined market value of all cryptocurrencies in circulation reached US $ 170 billion by the end of August 2017 , 850 % higher than at the beginning of the year , according to , a leading cryptocoin prices and market capitalisation tracker website . It is no surprise that this kind of growth sparked much hand-wringing among regulators and central banks , who are still undecided whether cryptocurrencies should be classified as a commodity , an asset or a form of currency . That might seem like an odd discussion to be having . But one of the basic functions of currency is to facilitate transactions in a timely manner . And to protect the security ( the technology behind cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin ) , the processing of Bitcoin transactions is sometimes very slow . Due to restrictions on the limit of Bitcoin transactions which can be completed in a day , it may take a few days to complete a single transaction , rendering the cryptocurrency unable to fulfil the basic function of money at times . Private blockchains can speed up transactions but they are not popular and availability is limited . Money worries The call to better regulate cryptocurrency gained momentum after the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) stating that banks should consider investing in cryptocurrencies : Rapid advances in digital technology are transforming the financial services landscape , creating opportunities and challenges for consumers , service providers and regulators alike . Any wholesale adoption by the banking sector would clearly establish a huge market for cryptocurrencies , but the traffic isn ’ t moving entirely one way . Chinese regulators dealt a huge blow to the crypto market at the beginning of September when the People ’ s Bank of China through Initial Coin Offerings ( ICOs ) . An ICO is a fundraising tool that trades future cryptocoins in exchange for cryptocurrencies of immediate , liquid value . They have become an easy platform for digital currency geeks to raise funds quickly . In simpler terms , ICOs are a crowdfunding platform for future cryptocoins . They have already raised US $ 2.32 billion , . China is getting stricter in general . It that it may ban the trading of virtual currencies on domestic exchanges entirely . If this goes ahead , it will certainly dampen the enthusiasm around the sector . But there always seems to be some better news round the corner , and more oversight may well generate the confidence that can overcome concerns . The Russian finance ministry is pushing to regulate the use of cryptocurrencies in the country , while the central bank has been working on regulation for digital currencies since the beginning of the year . Perhaps the biggest boost for cryptocurrencies came from Finland ’ s central bank economists , who called the infrastructure behind crypctocurrencies such as Bitcoin “ revolutionary ” and . There has also been recognition for cryptocurrencies in countries , which are both implementing polices to legalise cryptocurrencies exchanges . Japan has made it mandatory for Bitcoin exchanges to register with regulators and undergo annual auditing by certified accountants . Singapore ’ s central bank noted that the function of digital tokens went beyond simply being a virtual currency while asserting some oversight . It that ICOs would have to be approved or recognised by the bank or recognised under Singapore ’ s Securities and Futures Act . In the US , the Securities and Exchange Commission echoed that sentiment , as securities and any unregistered offerings could be subject to criminal punishment . Two options This kind of growing acceptance – China aside – is an acknowledgement of the growing popularity of cryptocurrencies as a financial instrument . Looking further ahead , regulators have two options . First , they could implement stricter regimes to ensure cryptocurrency transactions are not related to dark net activities , terrorism financing or money laundering activities . Alternatively , central banks could start issuing their own digital currency known as Central Bank issued Digital Currency ( CBDC ) based on the distributed ledger technology ( DLT ) , the same blockchain technology behind the cryptocurrencies . This raises the possibility of CBDCs destroying the value proposition of existing cryptocurrencies . The Bank of England in the initial discussion while its peers in , and at the all analyse the feasibility of launching digital currencies . The wider discussion on CBDCs is a testimony to the fact that central banks are serious about cryptocurrencies , and in a way competing with their growing popularity . In the worst case scenario for this still fledgling market , central banks could decide to make trading or possessing cryptocurrencies illegal . That would be tough to enforce as there is no single organisation or person that controls cryptocurrencies and transactions don ’ t go through a central clearing house . There is precedent , however . Back in 1933 , the US president , Franklin Roosevelt , made and required all Americans to hand over their cache of gold to the Federal Reserve . If that happens here , then the cryptocurrency market would die a natural death . It all rests now with the central bankers . China has offered a glimpse of a difficult future ; crypto evangelists will hope others continue down the more accommodating path .Banking sector will be ground zero for job losses from AI and robotics September 12 , 2017 2.06pm BST University of Salford Authors Co-director , Centre for Digital Business , University of Salford Senior Lecturer in Centre for Digital Business , University of Salford Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Deutsche Bank CEO John Cryan has as automation takes hold across the finance sector . Every signal is that he will be proved right very soon . Those roles in finance where the knowledge required is systematic will soon disappear . And it will happen irrespective of how high a level , how highly trained or how experienced the human equivalent may currently be . Regular and repetitive tasks at all levels of an organisation already do not need to be done by humans . The more a job is solely or largely composed of these routines the higher the risk of being replaced by computing power . The warning signs have been out there for a number of years as about artificial intelligence have been tempered with fears about in most sectors of the economy . Many roles have already all but disappeared in the march towards a fully digital economy . Older readers may recall typesetters , typists , and increasingly , switchboard operators and back room postal workers , as work of the last century . And the . Banking on jobs The finance sector was once driven by human judgement and decision making . But slowly , it has changed . One-to-one conversations with your local bank manager were replaced by scripted call centre interactions during the 1990s . Today , increased processing power , massive cloud storage , strong encryption and an increase in the use make possible tasks that had previously been seen as too complex for automation to be done quickly and consistently . Artificial intelligence reduces the need for human work that requires analysis , consistent applications of decisions and judgement calls . These are pivotal actions for many legal and financial activities . Combined , in the background , with blockchain – essentially a publicly shared automated ledger of agreed contracts – arrangements that require some form of trust between two parties will also be able to be completed with little or no human intervention . Blockchain is the basis of every cryptocurrency – forms of money exchanged online . Banks are slowly working towards ways of . While alternative forms of money attract popular headlines it is the automation behind the scenes that is most compelling aspect for the finance sector . By removing the influence of human decision making from as many processes as possible , a fully digital supply chain can be created . As artificial intelligence learns more about the impact and influence of every process each time it happens , a bank ’ s efficiency should continuously improve , and profits increase , with fewer and fewer employees . Protected In this atmosphere of change to the world of work in banking , however , there are some roles that will prove more . Work that is unpredictable or inherently people-focused will survive . Customer service staff will still need to tackle the inevitably complex queries that are the product of the human mind rather than the outcome of algorithms . AI will deal with most enquiries , but will inevitably need to transfer the most cryptic to a human interlocutor . Mortgage decisions , for example , will come as an automatically generated message ; more intricate questions will still require face-to-face conversations . At the other end of the ( pay ) scale senior executives will continue to steer the direction of their individual organisations , although the nature of their work will subtly change to become technology-based decisions . Executives will find themselves choosing an algorithm instead of directly making a high-risk investment decision , or they may end up selecting an artificial intelligence machine rather than interviewing people to become employees . Reduction in the wage bill at other levels of the business and the increasing significance of the few human decisions that need to be made may even assist in justifying their . Inevitable change The traditional banking sector is an obvious area for artificial intelligence and automation to generate competitive advantages for companies . This is a result , in part , of previous reluctance to embrace change . In the late 1990s there was a collective hysteria around and fear of a wholesale shutdown of computers which failed to cope with the millennium date change . That highlighted the sector ’ s uneasy relationship with fast-moving technological change . But even this public panic prompted few immediate , practical changes . Now , mobile app-only banks , with no branches , such as , challenge the traditional banking sector and its human resources legacy . Traditional banks are still largely oriented towards humans doing most of its work . In 2016 , were employed in the finance services sector , the biggest tax contributor to the UK economy and the country ’ s largest exporter . Most predictions claim around 50 % of the jobs in the sector . Depending on who you listen to , this process will take between five and 20 years . The impact of these changes will be felt . There exists a genuine fear that artificial intelligence , robotics and fully digital businesses may contribute to a . Deutsche Bank ’ s CEO is being frank about a future where jobs in banking and elsewhere will become ever more scarce as digital business becomes a reality . This realisation has reinvigorated calls for a ( UBI ) or a social dividend in the UK and elsewhere . The proposal has found as a means to maintain personal levels of prosperity in this new world . Crucially too , the UBI would seek to maintain the foundations of the current Western economy in an era of increasingly fully automated digital businesses – a goal , if achieved , which might also just about keep the current finance and banking sector in business .Are cryptocurrencies a dream come true for ? September 12 , 2017 3.17am BST University of North Carolina – Greensboro Author Professor of Management , University of North Carolina – Greensboro Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list More cryptocurrencies appear all the time . When malicious software takes over , and demands a ransom to decode the information , regular , and slam to a halt . Sometimes security researchers release a fix that allows computer owners to , but many people are forced to pony up to free their data . In 2016 , the FBI estimated that the – and that ’ s only the cases . All that money isn ’ t paid in cash . Before digital currencies existed , extortionists asked victims to send money by more formal transfer companies like Western Union or make deposits to bank accounts . Those were easily traced . Today , ransomware attacks demand payment in bitcoin and its ilk , systems praised by supporters for their transaction speed and . In researching cybercrime and cybersecurity for more than a decade , I have found that obtaining cybercrime proceeds is often the . In this regard , diffusion of cryptocurrencies is a major development that enables cybercriminals to achieve their goals . In fact , the escalation of ransomware attacks and the increasing prominence of cryptocurrencies may be connected . Some companies have invested in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies specifically so they can . That helps contribute to the rapid growth in use and value of e-currencies . And as digital currencies become more common , ransomware attackers will have an easier time hiding their illicit transactions among the growing crowd of legitimate transfers . Using cryptocurrencies in cyber extortion The extortionists behind most ransomware attacks demand payments in bitcoin , the most popular cryptocurrency . The WannaCry attackers demanded per computer ; the Petya ransomware before providing a code that would let victims decrypt their data . Not many people actually pay , though : WannaCry victims paid only . If everyone infected had paid , the criminals would have received at least $ 60 million . It translated to a payout rate of 0.4 percent . Even fewer paid the Petya perpetrators : They got , totaling barely over 4 bitcoins , or about $ 18,200 . Other attacks are more successful : In June , a ransomware attack hit owned by South Korean web hosting firm Nayana . More than 3,400 of the company ’ s customers were affected – mostly small businesses running their websites on Nayana ’ s equipment . Nayana itself stepped up , taking loans to in bitcoins to the attackers , saying it had . The attackers don ’ t always need to make much money to be effective . Many cybersecurity researchers believe that Petya attacks were carried out rather than for financial gains . But ransomware has a much higher payout rate than other common cybercrimes . One study found that for every 12.5 million spam emails sent promoting a fake online pharmacy , the . That ’ s a success rate of about 0.000008 percent . They make a lot of money – – only by sending out enormous numbers of messages . Trusting cyberthieves ? One reason cybercrime success rates are low is that victims don ’ t trust the extortionists to once they get paid . In 2016 , about a quarter of the organizations that paid ransoms were . The WannaCry attackers were particularly bad : Their system was labor-intensive , requiring the criminals to manually connect payments with encrypted files before letting victims decode them . In fact , a made it almost impossible to decrypt a paying victim ’ s data . More sophisticated methods do exist , including those that incorporate what are called “ , ” another aspect of some cryptocurrency systems that runs a particular program as part of completing a transaction . In those ransomware attacks , making payment a victim needs to decrypt and recover hijacked files . Preparing for future ransomware The fear of ransomware is growing . In mid-2016 , a study found that had bought bitcoins just in case they needed to pay off ransomware attackers . More than 35 percent of large firms , those with more than 2,000 employees , reported being to unlock critical files . Even in case of a future ransomware attack . At the same time , bitcoin and other similar systems are becoming much more popular . In 2016 , the total value of all cryptocurrencies was . By August 2017 , that number had increased more than eight-fold , . The World Economic Forum projects cryptocurrencies will hold . These cycles are self-reinforcing : The more transactions there are involving cryptocurrencies , the harder it will be to . As a result , cybercriminals will use cryptocurrencies more often – forcing their victims ( and even potential targets ) to invest in cryptocurrencies , too . Worth reading : Bitcoin , BlackBerry , time travel and other outcomes August 18 , 2017 12.03am BST University of Toronto Author Professor of Strategic Management , University of Toronto Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Editor ’ s note : The Conversation Canada asked our academic authors to share some recommended reading . In this instalment , Joshua Gans , an economist who wrote about how an , offers up new picks along with a few of his favourite books . Before Babylon , Beyond Bitcoin Before Babylon , Beyond Bitcoin By David Birch ( Non-fiction . Hardcover , 2017 . London Publishing Partnership ) David Birch ’ s previous book , Identity is the New Money , was fantastic in the way it drew a relationship between the money you have and your identity in society . This follow-up includes an analysis of such as . Money is a deeper issue than many economists appreciate . Indeed , it is something economists ignore by assumption : Money sits in the background without an impact itself on real economic decisions . That ’ s why I always value alternative perspectives that make me think . I ’ m looking forward to reading this one but it will have to wait until I have a good chunk of time to get the most out of it . Losing the Signal Losing the Signal By Sean Silcoff and Jacquie McNish ( Non-fiction . Hardcover , 2015 . Flatiron Books . ) This book , written by two Canadian journalists , is the definitive business history of BlackBerry , maker of what was once a must-have namesake smartphone . It traces the history of the Canadian technology giant ’ s “ extraordinary rise and spectacular fall , ” to quote the subtitle . For example , the book offers unparalleled insight into how disruption can be caused by internal decisions . I believe it ’ s a must-read for anyone seeking to understand disruption and why successful firms fail . On Intelligence On Intelligence By Jeff Hawkins with Sandra Blakeslee ( Non-fiction . Hardcover , 2004 . St. Martin ’ s Press . ) is the inventor of the PalmPilot electronic assistant that made a pocket computer an essential personal tool and paved the way for the BlackBerry , iPhone and other mobile computers . His book is 13 years old but has as its central thesis — that intelligence is all about predictive ability — is now at the centre of the recent explosion in machine learning and artificial intelligence . All Our Wrong Todays All Our Wrong Todays By Elan Mastai ( Fiction . Hardcover , 2017 . Doubleday Canada . ) An interesting time travel journey wrapped up in a family drama where consequences remain consequences . It is also mostly set in Toronto , making it nicely familiar for Canadian readers . One of the things I appreciated about this book is that it deals with a big time travel problem : How can you go back in time and end up in the same physical place you started when the Earth is always moving through space — on its axis , around the sun , in the solar system , in the Milky Way — while the galaxy itself is moving through the universe ? That alone makes All Our Wrong Todays more thoughtful than the usual offerings on this subject . [ Editor ’ s note : this book in his reading list . ] The Plot Against America By Philip Roth ( Fiction . Hardcover , 2004 . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group . ) An alternative history in which , the famous aviator , wins the presidency in 1940 and keeps the United States out of the Second World War . Suffice to say , for anyone living in 2016 and 2017 observing U.S. politics today , there is something chilling about this book given that Roth wrote it a decade ago . You will recognize the trends and concerns that perhaps make up the American mindset that leave its democracy vulnerable to populism .South Africa needs a sensible debate about its Reserve Bank . Here ’ s a start July 11 , 2017 7.47pm BST University of the Witwatersrand Authors Distinguished Professor and Derek Schrier and Cecily Cameron Chair in Development Economics , School of Economics and Business Sciences , University of the Witwatersrand PhD candidate Development Economics , School of Economics and Business Sciences , University of the Witwatersrand Disclosure statement Partners provides support as a hosting partner of The Conversation AFRICA . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Stable food prices are a central issue for South Africa ’ s Reserve Bank . But should it be doing more to protect the poor ? Debates on monetary policy in South Africa over the last couple of decades seem to have come from a madhouse . First , in the 1990s the country had old discredited rammed down its throat . This was done with little regard for alternative progressive ideas and little or no democratic debate or public participation . And then recently the country ’ s Public Protector , Busisiwe Mkhwebane released that made sweeping populist recommendations about the South Africa Reserve Bank . The report favoured revising the country ’ s constitution and a binding recommendation for a monetary policy regime that excludes any reference to price stability . A mandate like this simply doesn ’ t exist in any comparable country with a well-developed private banking system . To put the report in context we want to focus on basic monetary policy principles that have been debated for centuries by serious thinkers and scholars . We also explore how South Africa can move the debate forward constructively and responsibly . Broadly , thinkers on monetary policy can be considered on a scale with advocates on the one side , and those concerned that money and banking must serve the productive economy – let ’ s call them advocates – on the other . We locate ourselves unambiguously on the “ serve-society ” side of the debate . We agree with who served in the British Treasury in 1695 , who said that money supply must serve society . in the 19th Century , , the trade union leader and in 20th Century , concurred . Unlike Mkhwebane ’ s report , these economists , particularly Keynes and Minsky , understood that currency and money markets under capitalism have a nasty tendency to be unstable . That ’ s why the regulatory and lender of last resort function of the Reserve Bank is so vital . ( When the operations of the inter-banking lending market cease to operate , the lender of last resort is the entity – usually a Central Bank – that has sufficient liquidity to lend to banks short of funds . ) has performed these roles moderately well for almost a century . The country hasn ’ t had a systemic banking crises since the formation of the Reserve Bank in 1921 . Experts in the field , find that South Africa is among the most stable top 13 banking systems in the world . The Reserve Bank should take credit for much of that . That doesn ’ t mean that it ’ s beyond criticism which is why a serious debate is needed . The debate doesn ’ t need to rely on the ideas of fringe adventurers and crackpots . The country has a wealth of intellectual talent on monetary and central banking policy inside and outside its universities that straddle the ideological spectrum . The country ’ s public intellectuals in the unions and in civil society organisations have excellent ideas on central banking and monetary policy . Ordinary citizens should be drawn in too . One thing is clear : things can not remain as they are because so much is changing in the world of central banking and in economic life . The two camps tend to view banking as just another business , best left to the free market . Historically sound money economists have preferred deregulation of the banking system . But since the spectacular collapse of thousands of banks in many parts of the world in the , and the banking and financial crises after 2008 , very few now propose abolishing the lender of last resort function of central banks . Sound money economists now want central bankers bound by rules , rather than allowing for discretion . But they still focus on the virtues of trade and private finance . For their part , “ serve-society ” advocates worry about production , employment and growth . Keynes – by no measure a crank or a crackpot – was very much in favour of adjusting monetary and fiscal policy where necessary . He was a passionate advocate of sound banking and financial regulation because he understood the inherent instability of capitalism . He warned that getting it wrong could massively increase poverty and unemployment . In 1933 he three safeguards when shifting economic policy priorities : Firstly , don ’ t be doctrinaire . Secondly , he maintained that “ the economic transition of a society is a thing to be accomplished slowly ” . And thirdly , don ’ t allow “ intolerance and the stifling of instructed criticism ” . For those not in public office he offered this final piece of advice : Words ought to be a little wild – for they are the assault of thought on the unthinking . A changing world Conventional notions of what central banks are , and of what they should do , face a number of . For example , the processes of technological innovation , including the growth of , are rapidly reshaping some of the core functions of central banks . And over the last three decades a number of economic factors have forced central banks to . They ’ ve had to do so to align their functions with other states in the wake of greater economic regionalisation , the creation of and the establishment of regional central banks . The also shook confidence in the ability of central banks to use their reputedly vast capacity and skills to predict and head off the crisis . This has been particularly true as far as their regulatory responsibilities to promote financial stability are concerned . As pointed out by Princeton Professor and former deputy-Governor of the Banque du France , , a return to the status quo ante in respect of central bank policy is neither desirable nor indeed feasible . Despite this warning the status quo ante is being defended all over the world as if nothing has changed , and as if all is well in our economies . Let the debate begin After the release of the Public Protector ’ s report the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank , Lesetja Kganyago , offered the potential space to begin a serious about South African monetary policy aimed at creating a more inclusive and prosperous society and economy . But , he warned , such a discussion would have to be based on “ evidence and sound analysis ” . In our view ideas must come from across the ideological spectrum . And they must be debated in legitimate and properly structured forums . One place to begin the discussion would be Parliament ’ s Portfolio Committee on Finance . Other structures – such as the Reserve Bank ’ s Monetary Policy Forums ( as proposed by the governor ) and forums led by business , labour and civil society organisations as well as universities – need to keep up the momentum . There must be no place for defensive postures , arrogance or condescension . The debate must be guided by one overriding objective : to improve the quality of life of the many South Africans for whom the end of apartheid has brought no real material change ? It must consider the impact of change on employment , investment and growth .Bitcoin ’ s central appeal could also be its biggest weakness July 7 , 2017 12.01pm BST Lancaster University Author Senior lecturer , Lancaster University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoin reached a huge new peak in value in June 2017 , when one unit of the virtual currency ( £2,208 ) , up from around US $ 600 just a year earlier . people worldwide are now thought to own bitcoin and accept it for goods ( not counting all those using it to sell drugs and other illegal items on the black market ) . Part of bitcoin ’ s appeal for many of its users is the by any government or bank . Instead it relies on a technology known as blockchain to underpin and secure transactions . But research my colleagues and I have conducted suggests that the lack of any social trust in the way blockchain operates poses a challenge for bitcoin ’ s further spread . a public database that records digital transactions . These are validated by computers working within a worldwide network that solve complex coded problems . Whereas traditional bank transactions are authorised by financial institutions and controlled by governments through taxation and contracts between parties with known identities , blockchain is decentralised , unregulated and anonymous . In our we found that these features because of increasing distrust of financial institutions and governments . The technology empowers people to regain control over their money , with over where and when they can send it . But our findings also indicate that two core aspects of blockchain ’ s design – the fact that transactions are anonymous and irreversible – pose to the social trust among its users . Anonymity has an obvious appeal for people looking to avoid government control . And irreversible transactions were built into blockchain ’ s original design as a positive feature to address banks ’ privilege of reversing transactions , even when the contract states that they were final . But in practice , these features are a problem for many people . Most people are used to relying on the reputation of a seller to decide whether or not to buy from them – and the ability of the financial and legal system to help them if something goes wrong . But neither of these things are possible through blockchain . Paper trails have their advantages Most transactions don ’ t just involve moving bitcoin from one electronic wallet to another . In practice , they are often part of a larger , two-way transactions where both parties send and receive assets such as bitcoins , real world currency or physical goods . The issue is that the blockchain only records the movement of bitcoin , not the movement of other currencies or goods . Because there is no authority to complain to , this raises a major risk that users could fall prey to dishonest traders who fail to deliver their side of the deal . In our latest study , we interviewed 20 bitcoin users recruited from five online groups from Malaysia , most of them with more than two years experience of using bitcoins . indicates that more than 50 % of participants would prefer blockchain ’ s transactions to be regulated and identifiable , so that transactions can be either reversed or the dishonest trader legally sanctioned . This shows there is a tension between the freedom and empowerment of blockchain ’ s unregulated nature , and the lack of security that most people are accustomed to receiving from traditional financial institutions . If this is not addressed , such tension may limit the spread of bitcoin beyond its current base . It could even reduce the number of bitcoin users involved in such two-way transactions , as more people become aware of the risks of dishonest traders . In contrast , the use of blockchain for one-way transactions such as remittance payments will continue to grow , as they are less affected by dishonest traders . What can be done ? Even bitcoin ’ s current users still operate largely under the traditional mindset of centralised and regulated currencies . Bitcoin advocates may need to find ways to encourage users to develop a new mental approach to unregulated blockchain technology . But developers could also build tools to address some of bitcoin users ’ concerns . For example , there may be a way to record whether the real-world elements of bitcoin transactions are also verified , authorised and stored on the public ledger . Electronic wallets could be linked to a reputation file that users could view before agreeing to a deal , much like sites such as eBay allow consumers to rate sellers . And new mechanisms built on top of the irreversible blockchain protocol could enable individual two-way transactions to be reversed . Without doing something to tackle these challenges , the very thing that caught people ’ s attention about bitcoin in the first place could end up stifling its growth and eventually consigning it to history .
shutterstock . Alternative currencies are the future : why it matters for development July 2 , 2017 9.37am BST University of Pretoria Author Full Professor of Political.Economy , University of Pretoria Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a partner of The Conversation AFRICA . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list When I began to teach in 2012 , I decided to start my course with an analysis of how money affects social order . What my students found particularly fascinating was the then-nascent world of cryptocurrencies , which I described at length as a crucial feature in the future of money . Some colleagues criticised my approach . They accused me of indirectly encouraging students to invest in what they saw as a shady , crime-ridden financial underworld . But I was simply exposing young minds to a fast-evolving , complex phenomenon that in my view would have a major impact on power distribution in the global economy . Behind most cryptocurrencies is a simple technology known as “ ” , a system residing in multiple computers that allows for peer-to-peer financial ledger recording of all transactions occurring in a network . This results in a transparent open-access registry of monetary flows which makes the intermediation of banking authorities unnecessary . Thus it challenges the conventional belief that money can only work through central planning . As I explain in my book , , money systems are undergoing an unprecedented transition from centralised authority to decentralised networks . Conventional money is managed by states and banks , with users on the receiving end of monetary policy decisions . By contrast , most alternative currencies are peer-to-peer . That means they are managed by users themselves and do not require intermediaries . Some of them have global outreach thanks to digital technology , while others are locally based . Take BitCoin , the most popular peer-to-peer currency in the world , with a market capitalisation . A person buying the equivalent of $ 1 in BitCoin in 2009 would now possess roughly $ 25 million . One BitCoin is currently equivalent in value to two ounces of gold . Other rising stars include Ethereum , Litecoin and Ripple . Taking the world by storm Many of these currencies remain quite volatile in the short term . Their upward and downward swings reach over 10 % of the value on a weekly basis . But the long-term trend is impressive . States are warming up to them . In April 2017 , Japan as a legal payment method for retail markets . After threatening digital currencies last year , the Russian government took a U-turn . President Vladimir Putin and committed to recognising cryptocurrencies in 2018 . Following an initial freeze , the People ’ s Bank of China in BitCoin in June 2017 , catapulting the currency to new heights . In the US , cryptocurrencies are becoming increasingly as both a method of payment and store of value . The Australian government will soon make it easier for new innovative digital currency businesses , exempting traders and investors from goods and services tax . It ’ s clear that cryptocurrencies will in the near future become much more common as methods of payment for a wide range of purchases , from online shopping to the local supermarket . Developing countries are leapfrogging Developing economies , too , are opening up to cryptocurrencies . In , BitCoin has become the leading parallel currency . It provides millions of citizens with an opportunity to perform transactions and generate livelihoods , including buying food and other basic necessities in a country where official money is worth almost zero . It also allows them to purchase goods from overseas , overcoming ever-stricter capital controls . In East Africa , local innovators have introduced cryptocurrency systems to support cross-border transactions , as exemplified by initiatives like . In , cryptocurrencies are becoming particularly popular . In , local traders and activists believe this new money presents an opportunity to democratise the economy . This is propelled by the fact that people in Nigeria have been failed by conventional money . According to my colleague Verengai Mabika , founder of in Zimbabwe , the collapse of his country ’ s formal financial system has made BitCoin an attractive alternative . This is especially the case for online payments , which are restricted by banks , and for remittances , which constitute the backbone of the economy . A growing number of Zimbabweans are also using cryptocurrencies as a saving mechanism ( 37 % of all Bitfinance customers use it for that purpose ) , Verengai tells me . This is after the massive loss of personal savings during the hyperinflation period of 2008 , which led to the collapse of the country ’ s banks . Decentralisation and local economic development The decentralisation of money is indeed at the core of this new trend , with potential repercussions in other fields . For instance , is designed as a smart contract platform , that is a trading system completely based on peer-to-peer property rights . was developed as the preferential currency for cooperatives , social economies and fair trade networks around the world . Cryptocurrencies are just the tip of an iceberg . According to , there are over 6,000 complementary currencies in the world , over 50 times the number of conventional money systems . Most of these are user-controllled and are interest-free . One can not make money by simply trading in them . Hoarding makes no sense in this new world . This is because value is not in the accumulation but in the exchange . The scope is often limited to certain territories or types of transactions ( for example , personal care , sustainable mobility and local trade ) . This creates an incentive to support local economic development and forms of exchange that are valued by communities of users . , a network of local currencies which I studied when I was a researcher in Germany , has proliferated throughout the country . It has become the world ’ s largest system of local currencies , supporting small businesses and empowering communities . In the near future , we will have a variety of money with different qualities and different purposes . This will make economies more resilient against shocks and will support more equitable and sustainable development , by putting users in the driver seat and reinforcing local economic development . As demonstrates , a combination of regional , national and local currencies could also be the best way forward for the European Union , engulfed by its monolithic and unsustainable euro , and for any other process of regional integration , from Africa to other continents . An Indian man displays new currency notes of 2,000 Indian rupee . Cash is falling out of fashion – will it disappear forever ? June 26 , 2017 2.07am BST Tufts University Author Senior Associate Dean , International Business & Finance , Tufts University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list On June 27 , the . Former U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker once described it as the “ . ” But today , the cash that ATMs dispense may be on the endangered list . Cash is being displaced in so many ways that it ’ s hard to keep track . There are credit cards and electronic payments ; apps such as Venmo , PayPal and Square Cash ; mobile payments services ; cryptocurrencies that operate outside the purview of central banks ; and localized offerings such as Kenya ’ s mPesa , India ’ s Paytm and Bangladesh ’ s bKash . These innovations are encouraging cashlessness across communities worldwide . It ’ s reasonable to expect cash to follow the path of other goods that have been replaced by digital alternatives , such as photos , music and movies . Will cash – and the ATMs that dispense it – experience a “ Blockbuster ” moment and disappear from our neighborhoods ? Not so fast . Cash will likely become less popular , thanks to the high cost of using cash and the growing array of alternatives . But I expect it will remain with us forever . The future will be “ less cash , ” rather than cashless . The cost of cash As of 2013 , approximately . Reliance on cash is quite uneven across the world . While Singapore , the Netherlands , France , Sweden and Switzerland are among , in Malaysia , Saudi Arabia , Peru and Egypt , only 1 percent of transactions are cashless . Even some highly advanced countries , such as Japan , are still highly reliant on cash . relative to EU countries . In 2015 , cash usage in the U.S. represented 13.1 percent of its GDP , whereas it represented just 7.1 percent in France and 4.5 percent in Switzerland . Concerns about social equity offer one motivation for lawmakers to push for cashless alternatives . My colleague and I have studied the , with a particular focus on the U.S. , Mexico , Egypt and India . Our shows that the poor and those with less access to institutions bear a disproportionate share of these costs of using cash . In the U.S. , for example , cash usage imposes a regressive tax on consumers , with the highest impact on people who do not have an account with a bank . that the unbanked pay four times more in fees to access their money than those with bank accounts . They also pay US $ 4 higher fees per month for cash access on average than those with formal financial services . Such fees include those charged for payday lending , buy-here-pay-here auto loans and check cashing . The unbanked have a five times higher risk of paying cash access fees on payroll and EBT cards . Poorer consumers also have to spend far more time getting cash . On average , Americans spend 28 minutes a month traveling to get cash , but that time isn ’ t evenly distributed . People who don ’ t use a bank spend about five minutes longer getting to the place where they can get cash , and unemployed people spent nearly nine minutes more . In the meantime , other scholars have argued for the benefits of a “ less cash ” society . has argued that eliminating higher-denomination banknotes can prevent currency from being used to fund illegal activities . A world without cash A combination of public and private initiatives are currently chipping away at the global predominance of cash , with some countries moving more quickly than others . , already high on the cashlessness scale , may become the first country to come close to a truly cashless state . Sweden ’ s history in banks promoting cash alternatives dates back to the 1960s , with digital bank transfers used to pay wages . Cards also become more popular in the 1990s , when banks also started charging a fee for checks . The app , Swish , developed by the major banks , is widely used today for digital money transfers by nearly half the population . Many businesses discourage use of cash , and retailers are legally allowed to refuse cash . In several other countries , governments are experimenting with innovative digital alternatives . In 2012 , the Royal Canadian Mint launched project , recently handed over to the private sector . The plan is to store cash on computer chips , enabling the transfer of money between chips through encrypted messages . In some countries , the private sector has led the way , creating “ less cash ” societies in the unlikeliest of places . Consider Somaliland , one of the poorest countries in the world . It stands at the forefront of a mobile payment revolution with . At over 30 mobile payment transactions a month on average , the average citizen of Somaliland is far ahead of the rest of the world ’ s average of 8.5 such transactions per capita per month . Perhaps the most dramatic nudge toward “ less cash ” was experienced recently in India . Last November , the Indian government made a high-risk , high-stakes move by demonetizing the 500 and 1,000 rupee banknotes , in effect . Their initial aim was to root out corruption and illegal activity funded by cash . New 500 and 2,000 rupee banknotes were issued , so consumers had to go to a bank and exchange their demonetized currency . In a country that is , this move led to disrupted enterprises , unpaid wages and long lines at banks . Mobile wallet players were the unqualified winners of the decision , with market leader Paytm claiming . However , despite the surge in mobile payments after demonetization , cash in India remains resilient . In March , five months after demonetization , were actually 0.6 percent higher than a year earlier . The future of cash What explains the resilience of cash , despite its costs and a growing array of alternatives ? Cash is unique among payment instruments in that anyone can transact , any time , any place , with no third parties involved . With this freedom comes strong privacy protection . Currency neither knows nor cares who holds it or when and where a transaction occurred . People have a visceral sense of security when they have cash with them . Much of this sentiment was uncovered in our spanning multiple countries . These thresholds will , of course , evolve as our societies become more digitally native . However , old habits and perceptions take a long time to turn over . Some merchants will resist the costs of new equipment or fees that accompany cash alternatives . Cash is also , while with digital transactions there ’ s always concerns about hacking and fraud . So , no matter where we are in the world , let us celebrate the ATM ’ s half-century of service . The human connection with cash will be hard to break . Though cash may become less popular , rest assured that there will always be someone who will stop you in the street asking for directions to the nearest ATM . Price hikes in Ether and Bitcoin aren ’ t the signs of a bubble June 19 , 2017 9.01pm BST RMIT University Authors Professor of Economics , RMIT University Principal Research Fellow , RMIT University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a strategic partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The change in the price of crypto-currencies , like Bitcoin , and other crypto-assets are due to investors realising the value . When there is a rapid growth in any of the crypto-currencies and assets such as Bitcoin , Ether , Zcash and others , many will call it out as a . Indeed , on a relatively short time scale it clearly looks like a . The entire currently stands at around US $ 100 billion ; it was US $ 60 billion one month ago . But Bitcoin was worth 1/100 of a US cent in June of 2009 , 7 cents in June 2010 , and US $ 7 in June of 2012 . Recently all eyes were on Ether . Over a 90 day period , Ether appreciated twice as quickly as Bitcoin did in late 2013 , when Bitcoin crashed to around 35 % of it ’ s highest value . Aside from the 2013 crash , Bitcoin has experienced smaller crashes many times since , but is now worth double its 2013 high . In the longer term , these are fluctuations around a strong growth trend . Crashes will cause some to abandon the field . But signals of longer term growth in these crypto-currencies and assets point to a possible emergence of a new type of market , through the building of a new economic infrastructure . Ether is the token of the , a platform that runs “ smart contracts ” through a distributed online ledger that records transactions . It ’ s second only to the crypto-currency Bitcoin in price . Some believe it will one day overtake Bitcoin ( a process dubbed “ ” ) . Price hikes not the sign of a bubble Fundamental aspects of the technology that underpins crypto-currencies and assets are causing people to re-imagine , and then enact , new ways of creating and exchanging value online . The key difference between Bitcoin and Ethereum is that you can use Bitcoin for payments , but you can use Ether to automate any number of processes using . While many use cases for Ethereum are still at the proof-of-concept stage , it is now attracting the attention of major banks , businesses and , all interested in the potential of the technology to provide greater efficiency and transparency in transactions . That normalisation has collapsed the implicit risk premium attached to this technology . Venture capitalist Albert Wenger describes the current activity in crypto-currencies and assets as “ ” . To explain what this is , take the example of the underlying internet and web protocols ( TCPI/IP and HTTP ) , used to build and run websites . These are not able to store value - therefore they are “ thin protocols ” in Wenger ’ s terminology . So instead , people invest in companies that make software ( applications ) and hardware that rely on these protocols . Companies such as Google and Facebook made a fortune by collecting and storing data generated by users through their online interactions . Meanwhile , users , and the developers who created internet and web protocol , received nothing in return . Blockchain is a “ fat protocol ” because it can be monetised , including incentives for developers but also for users . For example , the creator of JavaScript and co-founder of Mozilla , recently released an Ethereum-based web browser through which users can be paid for the attention they give to advertisements . What is making crypto-assets and currencies appear bubbly is the way in which many of these new platforms and applications have raised money through what are called . An initial coin offering ( a word play on ‘ initial public offering ’ ) is a mechanism by which developers sell the tokens associated with their platform to the public . Depending on the structure of the offering , buyers can usually then trade the tokens , creating secondary markets . As the founder of Ethereum , Vitalik Buterin , has noted , no-one has figured out the . This could be due to the immaturity of the Ethereum platform and ecosystem ( which started development in 2013 and went live only in 2015 ) . What we ’ re observing here is a new economic infrastructure being built and coming online . In tweets on Tuesday , Buterin himself from initial coin offerings , stating he would no longer agree to be an advisor . So while the current speculation in crypto-assets should make us pause , this is not speculative . It is speculative like building a new city , in that infrastructure needs to be developed first before you get to see who moves there . A further point to note is that investment bubbles are actually for building new technologies because of the way they concentrate speculative resources on a new technology to facilitate exploration . There is an enormous effort proceeding to building new crypto businesses and infrastructure on the Ethereum platform . If this platform does indeed begin to carry large parts of the global economy as predicted by , a business consultancy , then it ’ s still massively undervalued . These comments should not be construed as offering personal financial advice . What ’ s holding up the blockchain ? June 8 , 2017 8.10am BST Updated June 9 , 2017 3.17am BST University of Technology Sydney Author Lecturer in Commercial Equity and Disruptive Technologies and the Law , University of Technology Sydney Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrencies are still the only usecase for the blockchain . It ’ s not technology or regulation holding back - software that stores and transfers value or data across the internet - we just haven ’ t figured out the next big use-case . released this week by the CSIRO ’ s Data61 not only inject some well-researched gravitas into the conversation , they also provide insight into why some of the major blockchain projects have stalled . Since 2015 , , , and all over the world have raised billions of dollars to explore the blockchain . But the only really successful , scaleable use of the blockchain remains cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin . Bitcoins currently trade at almost , with a total market cap of A $ 61.4 billion . Think of the blockchain as a type of transparent spreadsheet or “ public ledger ” . When someone transfers a Bitcoin , for example , the transaction is verified by “ miners ” , encrypted and a “ block ” is added to the spreadsheet . Mining takes a lot of computing power , and so miners are incentivised to participate in the system with a reward of bitcoin . It ’ s finding a way to put all these pieces together for purposes other than cryptocurrencies that has yet to be figured out . Because of all the computing power required to verify and encrypt new blocks , is expensive and consumes a lot of electricity . For this reason , a blockchain should only be used if it solves particular problems . For example , a blockchain could allow users to see each other ’ s ledgers and transactions , negating the need for a trusted third party to manage risk . The blockchain itself , through sophisticated cryptography , would provide privacy and trust . Conversely , if there is already a central third party managing trust between users and verifying transactions ( something banks already do for consumers ) , then a blockchain is probably not needed at all . Failing that , a sophisticated database or expert system would be a cheaper and simpler alternative . Opportunities and risks The describe some of the possible opportunities for the blockchain in Australia , including monitoring the outbreak of pests or animal and plant diseases , border surveillance , tracking intellectual property , and identity systems that provide greater certainty over entitlements , benefits , and tax obligations . The reports also identify some of the risks . The risks include both business and technical risks . For example , public ledgers do not afford privacy and blockchains generally are not suitable for storing large volumes of high speed data . Bitcoin ’ s blockchain has been suffering from for more than a year . Finding a solution is a priority for any developers wanting to attract the number of users needed to make running a network profitable . The use of blockchain in financial transactions also poses problems for compliance with , which requires that anyone providing financial services ( for example ) must satisfy themselves as to the identity of their client or customer . These shortcomings may explain why a number of high-profile blockchain projects have recently stalled . For example , last week , the Bank of Canada that its blockchain project , Jasper , is not yet fit to handle settlements . Citing transparency and privacy issues , the bank found that the benefits of using blockchain did not outweigh the risks . But risk is not the only reason that blockchain projects are stalling . In February 2017 , the of banks and technologists announced after more than 18 months of investment , innovation , and testing , that they would not be using blockchain for their project because they did not need it . Meanwhile , in a delivered to the Africa Blockchain Conference in March 2017 , Andreas Antonopoulos warned that many recent “ blockchain ” projects are fraudulent attempts to raise capital under the guise of innovation and disruptive technologies . The blockchain ’ s holy grail While bitcoin has proven what the blockchain can do , the technology still needs a killer app to justify the hype . The most likely contender is currently a “ ” . Smart contracts are programmable transactions with complex internal logic that can interact with internet-enabled devices and other smart contracts . At this time , the problem with smart contracts is that they are susceptible to manipulation . What is needed to test the capacity of the blockchain is a small-scale low-stakes low-risk smart contract that ( for example ) regulates energy consumption , manages permissions , or ensures payment on supply . Data61 ’ s lists some contenders , but first we need to manage the risk of fraud , breach of privacy , and blockchain bloat . Once these risks have been reduced to nil or negligible , the real work can resume . Bitcoin rich kids in Puerto Rico : crypto utopia or ? February 14 , 2018 3.06pm GMT Anglia Ruskin University Trinity College Dublin Authors Lecturer in Accounting and Finance , Anglia Ruskin University Professor of International Finance and Commodities , Trinity College Dublin Disclosure statement Partners and provide funding as members of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrency entrepreneurs have moved to Puerto Rico to build a crypto utopia – – where they plan to pay little in taxes . The crypto expats also hope to demonstrate how the city of the future will look with used for most transactions alongside the development of a new digital cryptocurrency . But it ’ s less clear about whose future – the few or the many – will be the driving force for change on the . Puerto Rico was devastated by last year ’ s and , with , it desperately needs investment to rebuild the island ’ s infrastructure . Puerto Rico was already before the calamity . It goes some way to explaining why local authorities are cautiously welcoming the arrival of cryptocurrency entrepreneurs on the island . But at what cost ? The term crypto-colonialism isn ’ t new . It was by Michael Herzfeld , but had nothing to do with cryptocurrencies – the bitcoin network didn ’ t come into existence until 2009 . Crypto-colonialism originally referred to countries , such as Greece and Thailand , seeking to acquire political independence at the expense of massive economic dependence . And it used the original meaning of the word “ crypto ” – concealed , hidden or secret . Such countries are nominally independent , but their national culture is refashioned to suit foreign models . The term colonialism in this sense is not overt at the point of a gun , but covert through the subversion of norms and cultures . Notably , this definition of crypto-colonialism remains applicable to the socioeconomic consequences of crypto utopia . Crypto land There is a deep link between . Cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin rely on a decentralised , extralegal and unregulated approach . But while the crypto billionaires will enjoy their Caribbean playground , poorer locals with little knowledge of the technology will be excluded . The mostly male entrepreneurs , who moved to Puerto Rico last year and plan to do more than create a cryptocurrency bank , will perhaps bring crypto libertarian ideas to the island . Their vision is similar to another would-be crypto utopia , the Free Republic of Liberland , which claims to be a “ micronation ” camped on the western bank of the Danube river . It as its “ national ” currency . Back on Sol , the wealthy crypto expats want to use the blockchain system for decentralised elections and even to issue citizenship ID . But we doubt that locals who are fighting poverty will be enthused by these ideas . This behaviour reeks of – the use of a natural or economic crisis to reshape and mould a society into one which entrenches a libertarian , hypercapitalistic worldview . When you are and feel ignored , any offer of help can seem a good lifeline with little thought for the consequences . Fight the power Crypto utopias can also cause severe environmental damage . Puerto Rico remains in a after , making the idea of Sol simply impractical . One bitcoin transaction 215 kilowatt-hours ( KWh ) , enough power to supply dozens of households on the island when the grid was at full capacity . The annual for increased from 9.5 terawatt-hours ( TWh ) per year to 48 TWh in the last 12 months – 2.5 times higher than Puerto Rico ’ s total consumption of 19 TWh . Resources and infrastructure , post-Hurricane Maria , are too stretched to support cryptocurrency mining on the island . Crypto rich kids made their fortune on the rapid growth of cryptocurrency markets – which are problematic due to their idiosyncratic risks . It ’ s a game for wealthy people who can cash out early and lock in gains , having been the developers of the . This is – those who get in early do well , those who cash in late do poorly . Our shows that cryptocurrency prices are relatively isolated from the shocks transmitted from other assets , such as gold and equities . But cryptocurrency prices are deeply interlinked with each other , so a fall in the price of bitcoin affects other virtual currencies . If bitcoin can ride out its latest , then it ’ s likely that crypto-colonialism will slowly spread around the globe . Crypto libertarians – if they follow the Sol model – could focus on those parts of the world that have been ravaged by earthquakes , tsunamis , hurricanes and economic crises . But cryptocurrency has also become a panacea for economic recovery . In December , Venezuela announced a creation of a new cryptocurrency – dubbed – backed up by Venezuelan reserves of precious metals , oil and diamonds . It hopes to use this cryptocurrency to fight US sanctions , high inflation and low oil prices . However , bitcoin solutions for developing countries – previously known as – shouldn ’ t be seen as the ultimate solution for disaster and crisis management . In the transition period , when the potential of cryptocurrencies and applications of blockchain are unexplored , we have to be sceptical of such initiatives as Sol . A bitcoin logo at a facility in Caracas , Venezuela . Bitcoin price manipulation puts trust in cryptocurrencies at risk June 26 , 2018 11.41am BST Tel Aviv University University of Tulsa Authors Professor of Economics , Tel Aviv University Assistant Professor of Computer Science and Tandy Chair of Cyber Security and Information Assurance , University of Tulsa Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrencies like bitcoin in large part because they can be bought and sold without a government or other third party overseeing everything . But there ’ s a flipside : Unlike in markets for other assets such as stocks or bonds , it makes it much harder to uncover price manipulation and fraud . But that ’ s what the Justice Department likely intends to do . In May , a criminal investigation to examine whether there has been price manipulation in the cryptocurrency markets . While it wasn ’ t clear what time period investigators are looking at , it ’ s likely that they ’ re focusing on the that occurred in late 2017 and early 2018 . The impact of illicit cryptocurrency trading could be large . For example , bitconnect , once the seventh-biggest digital coin , in January , and eroding trust in legitimate cryptocurrencies . have been digital currencies for the last several years . , published in the Journal of Monetary Economics earlier this year , found evidence of in 2013 and 2014 , when prices soared and then tumbled over several months . Could the failure to root out and prevent this kind of abuse erode trust in digital currencies ? Why cryptocurrency fraud matters First it ’ s worth considering why anyone should care about digital currencies . Their total market capitalization of about US $ 350 billion , for example , is just a fraction of the size of the , which is closing in on $ 100 trillion . Still , cryptocurrencies have soared in value in a very short period of time , climbing from just $ 14 billion in January 2014 . And since bitcoin became the first digital currency in 2009 , hundreds have launched , with more than 800 active today . While cryptocurrencies can in theory be used to purchase goods and services – they are called currencies after all – they must first attract large numbers of merchants and consumers , which hasn ’ t happened yet . That ’ s why , currently , crytocurrencies are primarily purchased as financial assets like stocks and bonds that buyers hope will appreciate in value over time . But unlike currencies , financial assets have a tendency to fluctuate wildly . And since investors without a lot of experience with risky assets purchasing cryptocurrencies , that puts them at risk when there ’ s a rapid rise and fall in prices . Bitcoin ’ s first roller-coaster ride That ’ s what happened to the in 2013 , when it jumped from around $ 150 in October to over $ 1,000 in December before dropping over 50 percent weeks later . By early 2014 , several people who traded on Mt . Gox , the leading bitcoin currency exchange at the time , “ suspicious activity ” on the exchange and about it . Our paper , titled “ , ” examined this suspicious trading activity . We were able to conduct the analysis because when Mt . Gox collapsed in early 2014 , its transaction history data got leaked . This gave researchers like us access to approximately 18 million transactions from April 2011 to November 2013 . The key is that these data linked transactions to user accounts – though not their real identities . With this information , we were able to link suspicious trades to accounts . Our analysis of the data confirmed much of what was reported in the “ anonymous ” documents . In the , we go into great detail to show why two trading mechanisms in particular should be considered suspicious . The first , known as the “ Markus bot , ” involved reporting trades that did not exist . The second , or “ Willy bot , ” involved trades in which Mt . Gox itself bought bitcoins from its own customers but did not let many of them withdraw the proceeds from their accounts . In a trial in Japan in 2017 , former Mt . Gox CEO Mark Karpeles that the exchange operated the “ Willy ” accounts and that the trades were issued automatically . The trading activity of these bots led to significantly increased trade at Mt . Gox and other exchanges as well . As a result , prices rose when the bots were active . We believe this is one type of suspicious trading that will likely be investigated by the Justice Department following the massive rise and fall in the price of bitcoin that occurred around the end of 2017 . Investors go for another ride Last year was a banner one for cryptocurrencies , particularly bitcoin , which soared from $ 1,000 at the end of 2016 to a peak of over $ 19,000 in December . The real spike , however , came in November when the in less than a month . The euphoria was over as quickly as it started as bitcoin plunged to $ 7,000 by February . University of Texas finance professors John M. Griffin and Amin Shams released an SSRN working paper in June that price manipulation likely led to more than 50 percent of the meteoric rise in bitcoin in 2017 . Their focus was on the flow of bitcoin going in and out of Bitfinex , which according to an in The New York Times is one of the largest and least regulated exchanges in the industry . Beyond bitcoin , the potential for price manipulation is even higher in digital currencies with much less trading volume . Moving forward Commenting about the market for digital coin offerings – where cryptocurrencies go public – Security and Exchange Commission Commissioner Robert Jackson in April that “ investors are having a hard time telling the difference between investments and fraud. ” The challenge for investigators and others in detecting price manipulation today is that there isn ’ t sufficient transparency about trading patterns of individuals , as there is in more regulated assets like stocks and bonds traded on stock exchanges like the Dow Jones and Nasdaq . In our research , we were fortunate to have internal trading data made public following Mt . Gox ’ s collapse . We do not have the same luxury today . The key lesson is that cryptocurrency markets need increased cooperation between financial regulators and trading platforms . For example , exchanges could be required to share information about the trading behavior of individuals with very large positions . This would help ensure that the trades taking place are in fact legitimate and reflect real sales . The consequence of not taking steps in this direction is likely a loss of faith in cryptocurrencies . Computer servers mining bitcoin in Italy . Stop worrying about how much energy bitcoin uses August 20 , 2018 11.31am BST University of Pittsburgh Author Research Associate in Electrical and Computer Engineering , University of Pittsburgh Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The word “ bitcoin ” is as likely to garner feverish excitement as it is glaring criticism . The financial community sees speculative promise in the form of trade that currently has little to no regulation . Meanwhile , others argue that it ’ s a distraction that detracts from the overall longevity of U.S. financial institutions . Bitcoin ’ s energy consumption has become a recent talking point in the debate . published May 30 indicates that bitcoin dramatically increases global energy consumption – and that electricity is its “ Achilles heel. ” clean energy technology , specifically the transition toward decarbonized energy systems . I think that the conversation around bitcoin and energy has been oversimplified . New technologies – such as data centers , computers and before them trains , planes and automobiles – are often energy-intensive . Over time , all of these have become more efficient , a natural progression of any technology : Saving energy equates to saving costs . By talking specifically about just the consumption of energy alone , I believe many fail to understand one of the most basic benefits of renewable energy systems . Electricity production can increase while still maintaining a minimal impact on the environment . Rather than focusing on how much energy bitcoin uses , the discussion should center around who indeed is producing it – and where their power comes from . Counting consumption Unlocking a bitcoin requires an intense amount of computational power . Think of bitcoin as sort of a hidden currency code , where its value is derived by solving a programmable puzzle . Getting through this puzzle requires computer brainpower . Electricity is 90 percent of the cost to mine bitcoin . As such , bitcoin mining uses an exorbitant amount of power : somewhere between in 2017 alone . That ’ s as much electricity as it takes to power the entire nation of Ireland in one year . Indeed , this is a lot , but not exorbitant . Banking consumes of power annually . If bitcoin technology were to mature by more than 100 times its current market size , it would still equal only 2 percent of all energy consumption . Power sources Bitcoin is certainly consuming an increasing amount of power worldwide , but is it increasing the world ’ s carbon consumption ? Bitcoin miners have traditionally , where coal supplies . Now , bitcoin mining is exploding in areas with cheap power , . Power there is mainly cheap due to the , a low-carbon resource . Bitcoin mining in China , with a largely fossil-based electricity source , may indeed be problematic . China is already one of the world ’ s . However , bitcoin mining in Oregon ? Not the same thing . Not all types of energy generation are equal in their impact on the environment , nor does the world uniformly rely on the same types of generation across states and markets . In Europe , for example , Iceland is becoming a . That nation . An abundant supply of geothermal and hydropower energy makes bitcoiners ’ power demand cheap and nearly irrelevant . Similarly , in the hydropower-driven Pacific Northwest , miners can still expect to turn a profit without . The right discussion Like many other aspects of the energy industry , bitcoin is not necessarily a “ bad guy. ” It ’ s simply a new , and vaguely understood , industry . The discussion about energy consumption and bitcoin is , I believe , unfair without discussing the energy intensity of new technologies overall , specifically in data centers . Rather than discussing the energy consumption of bitcoin generally , people should be discussing the carbon production of bitcoin , and understanding whether certain mining towns are adding to an already large environmental burden . Although there has been extensive discussion in the media of bitcoin ’ s energy consumption , I ’ m not aware of any studies that actually calculate the comparative carbon footprint of the bitcoin process . Global electricity consumption is going up overall . The U.S. Energy Information Administration nearly 28 percent over the next two decades . But increasing energy consumption is bad only if we aren ’ t shifting toward less carbon-dense power production . So far , it seems that only miners are currently shifting toward cleaner parts of the world . So perhaps people should quit criticizing bitcoin for its energy intensity and start criticizing states and nations for still providing new industries with dirty power supplies instead . A history of Bitcoin – told through the five different groups who bought it August 28 , 2018 1.59pm BST Loughborough University Author Reader in Sociology , Loughborough University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The recent in Bitcoin ’ s value are just the latest in a series of spectacular peaks and troughs since it was created in 2009 . ( Though its price has been falling recently , it remains five times higher than last April , before the latest major peak began . ) Commentators are often of Bitcoin buyers , writing them off as naive victims of a fraudulent bubble . But if we look more carefully , we can trace the history of Bitcoin through five key narratives . Each has drawn in a different group of buyers and in doing so contributed to its long-term growth in value . The idealists Bitcoin arose from a tiny group of cryptographers who were trying to solve the facing digital money : “ cash ” held as a digital file could easily be copied and then used multiple times . The problem is easily solved by financial institutions , who use a secure central ledger to record how much everyone has in their accounts , but the cryptographers wanted a solution that was more akin to physical cash : private , untraceable , and independent of third parties like the banks . Satoshi Nakamoto ’ s solution was the Bitcoin blockchain , a cryptographically secured public ledger that records transactions anonymously and is kept as multiple copies on many different users ’ computers . The first narrative of Bitcoin ’ s value was built into Nakamoto ’ s original “ ” . This claimed that Bitcoin would be superior to existing forms of electronic money such as credit cards , providing benefits like eliminating chargebacks to merchants and reducing transaction fees . The libertarians But from an early stage , Nakamoto also marketed Bitcoin to a libertarian audience . He did so by stressing the absence of any central authority and particularly Bitcoin ’ s independence from both states and existing financial institutions . Nakamoto criticised central banks for debasing money by issuing increasing amounts of it and designed Bitcoin to have a hard limit on the amount that could be issued . And he stressed the anonymity of Bitcoin transactions : safe , more or less , from the prying eyes of the state . Libertarians became enthusiastic advocates and buyers of Bitcoin , more as an act of rebellion than for financial reasons . They have remained highly influential in the Bitcoin community . The savvy young These , however , were small constituencies , and Bitcoin really started to take off in July 2010 when on Slashdot.org ( “ news for nerds ” ) spread the word to many young and technically savvy buyers . This community was influenced by the “ Californian ideology ” – belief in the capacity of technology and entrepreneurs to transform the world . Many bought small quantities at a low price and were somewhat bemused to find themselves sitting on significant investments when the price multiplied . They became used to huge fluctuations in the price and frequently advocated “ hodling ” Bitcoin ( a mis-spelling of “ hold ” , first used in a now posted by an inebriated user determined to resist constant “ sell ” messages from day traders ) . The hodlers insisted , half seriously , that Bitcoin was going “ to the moon ! ” ( used 178,000 times on the bitcointalk forums ) , and talked of buying “ lambos ” ( lamborghinis ) with their gains . This countercultural levity generated a sense of community and a commitment to holding Bitcoin that helps to sustain its value . The investors The last two groups that have contributed to Bitcoin ’ s history are more conventional . What I consider the fourth group of investors consists of speculators who have been attracted by the volatility and peaks in Bitcoin prices . On the one hand , we have the day traders , who hope to exploit the volatility of Bitcoin ’ s price by buying and selling quickly to take advantage of short-term price movements . Like speculators in any other asset , they have no real interest in the larger picture or of questions of inherent value , but only in the price today . Their only narratives are “ buy ” and “ sell ” , often employed in an attempt to influence the market . On the other hand , we have those who are drawn in by news of price bubbles . Ironically , bubble narratives in the press , often designed to deter investors , can have the opposite effect . These investors join what Keynes called a “ beauty contest ” – they only care what other people might be prepared to pay for a Bitcoin in the short to medium term future . The portfolio balancers The final and newest group of Bitcoin buyers are the portfolio balancers : more sophisticated investors who buy Bitcoin to hedge against wider risks in the financial system . According to modern portfolio theory , investors can reduce the riskiness of their portfolios overall by buying some Bitcoin because its peaks and troughs don ’ t line up with those of other assets , providing some insurance against stock market crashes . This is an emerging group , but one that could significantly raise Bitcoin ’ s acceptability among mainstream investors . Bitcoin ’ s value , then , has been built on an evolving series of narratives which have drawn in successive waves of buyers . While mainstream commentators are often dismissive of Bitcoin as lacking inherent value , all asset market values depend on narrative processes like these . Bitcoin may well collapse again , but so may any other financial asset . Investing in Bitcoin is neither more nor less risky than investing in the latest technology company launched on the stock market without ever having made a profit . Cryptocurrencies even have their own investment companies . Cryptocurrencies , blockchains and their dark side : 4 essential reads September 28 , 2018 11.35am BST The Conversation Authors Senior Editor , Economy + Business Politics + Society Editor , The Conversation US Editorial Researcher , The Conversation Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Crytocurrencies , after a wild ride , may be at a tipping point . Bitcoin and other digital currencies exploded in 2017 only to spend much of 2018 losing a large chunk of those gains . A unit of , the most popular cryptocurrency , climbed from under US $ 900 at the end of 2016 to a high of almost $ 20,000 in December 2017 and has since plunged to a little over $ 6,000 . The intense volatility and potential for hefty profits are catching the gaze of both and , either of which could jeopardize the future of cryptocurrencies . Here are four stories from that will help readers better understand cryptocurrencies and their dark underbellies . What is money in age of bitcoin ? Before we talk about digital money , we should define what money is in the first place . The answer is actually , according to University at Buffalo professor and philosopher David Koepsell . Money has changed so much recently that it has morphed into “ forms that are barely understandable. ” And so , Koepsell asks , as the blocks of zeros and ones that represent digital currencies replace the colorful pieces of paper and coins , does money still exist and if so what is its value ? “ Without government insurance or contractual guarantees , only mutual trust maintains the value and integrity of the system , ” he writes . “ What bitcoin owners own is the debt , just as those who own money in banks own debts that are recorded in bits . They do not own the bits that comprise the information representing that debt , nor the information itself , they own the social object – the money – that those bits represent. ” The value of blockchain What makes bitcoin and other digital currencies work is the underlying transaction system known as a blockchain . Essentially , it uses a decentralized database to track and store information in a potentially reliable and secure way . Beyond safeguarding money , however , blockchains may solve a “ stunning array of problems , such as stabilization of financial systems , identification of stateless persons , establishing title to real estate and media , and efficiently managing supply chains , ” Ari Juels and Ittay Eyal , computer science researchers at Cornell . Technical challenges of blockchains remain , but bitcoins are proof that they can work , they write . Enabling criminals One of the pitfalls of cryptocurrencies is that a key strength – that they provide anonymity to users – is also a significant weakness . That ’ s because their privacy fuels crime by enabling criminals to evade identification by law enforcement , . They believe the problem is only going to get worse as cryptocurrencies become even stronger , with no easy solution in sight . “ Crime-fighting tools require empowerment of authorities , ” the authors argue . “ Cryptocurrencies are innately anti-authority technologies . How this tension is resolved will determine the future of the world ’ s monetary systems. ” Manipulating bitcoin A problem that has long plagued financial assets is fraud and price manipulation , such as when traders work together to try to fix the price of a financial instrument . Digital currencies were thought to be more immune to that type of behavior . by Tel Aviv University ’ s Neil Gandal and University of Tulsa ’ s Tyler Moore suggests price manipulation in bitcoin and its peers is happening on a very large scale , which helps explain the sharp rises and falls in their prices in recent years . The Justice Department recently opened an investigation into whether there has been price manipulation in digital currency markets . “ The challenge for investigators and others in detecting price manipulation today is that there isn ’ t sufficient transparency about trading patterns of individuals , as there is in more regulated assets like stocks and bonds traded on stock exchanges like the Dow Jones and Nasdaq , ” Gandal and Moore write . “ The key lesson is that cryptocurrency markets need increased cooperation between financial regulators and trading platforms. ” “ The consequence of not taking steps in this direction is likely a loss of faith in cryptocurrencies , ” they conclude . The value of bitcoin gifts is subject to swift changes . Charities take digital money now – and the risks that go with it October 3 , 2018 11.32am BST University of Pittsburgh The Ohio State University Authors Associate Professor of Law , University of Pittsburgh Fisher Designated Professor of Accounting and Chair , Department of Accounting & Management Information Systems ( MIS ) , The Ohio State University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . provides funding as a member of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Many large charities , despite being that benefit the public , are accepting bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies – volatile forms of digital money – as donations . Take , for example , the , one of the country ’ s largest charities . It – nearly $ 4.5 billion – in digital assets according to its annual financial statement . As and charities face , we have spent considerable time examining what got nonprofits dabbling in digital currencies in the first place and what could go wrong as a result . Volatile juncture While the Silicon Valley Community Foundation probably holds more cryptocurrency than any other charity , it is not unique . , the , said digital money was its in 2017. are also accepting donations in bitcoin , as are new charities . The giving of , just as the market for these newfangled assets boomed . Bitcoin , the most common cryptocurrency , against the U.S. dollar in 2017 . XRP , the of digital money , gained over the course of the year . These gains gave way to massive losses in the first eight months of 2018 , when digital currencies plunged more sharply than . Some charities that received massive cryptocurrency donations in 2017 may not have been able to convert them into regular money before they lost much of their value the next year . Silicon Valley Community Foundation , for example , disclosed in its that for more than 45 percent of its investment assets , restrictions would prevent them from being converted to cash at any point in 2018 . The fact that charities only once a year means that the scale of their at-risk wealth , as of now , is unknown . Appreciated assets Why would charities accept digital money in the first place ? The answer has to do with changes in philanthropy in recent years . An of charitable giving is coming from a small group of extremely wealthy donors as the percentage of Americans who donate to nonprofits declines . And mega-donors don ’ t always give charities money . Instead , they pass along assets , such as stocks , bonds and bitcoin . That approach to giving benefits them in two ways . To see why , it helps to understand how these transactions work . Say a wealthy couple gives stock in a company that they bought at $ 1 per share . This was such a good investment that those shares are now worth $ 1,000 each . Upon donating , the couple gets a $ 1,000 deduction on that year ’ s tax return with another bonus : never having to pay taxes on the $ 999 gain in the value of that donated stock as income . That $ 1,000 can then offset the income tax on $ 1,000 of wages . Had the couple sold the stock and donated the same $ 1,000 , however , the donation would merely offset the gain from the sale of the stock . This opportunity means that many wealthy Americans benefit from donating assets that have become more valuable over time rather than by simply giving money . Consider how the top executives of Facebook have supported causes . As a company that , the wealth accrued to Facebook ’ s biggest shareholders is held in the form of stock that has gained value over time . It should be no shock , then , that the company ’ s leaders like CEO and Chief Operating Officer have sought to donate some of their Facebook stock to charity rather than giving cash . Zuckerberg and his wife Priscilla Chan have given Facebook stock worth to a , essentially a charitable savings account that on a large scale operates like a foundation without having to follow the rules that foundations must observe , at the Silicon Valley Community Foundation since 2010 . The couple gave another of their Facebook shares to a foundation associated with their Chan Zuckerberg Initiative in 2017 . For her part , in Facebook stock in both 2016 and 2017 . Facebook ’ s major shareholders are by no means the only ones using this strategy . , and executives have also moved massive amounts of their stock into charitable accounts . The urge to donate , especially once the meteoric rise in the value of bitcoin and similar assets created the opportunity for investors to reap huge potential charitable tax breaks , was only natural . Charitable middlemen The nonprofits that get these donations , meanwhile , need money they can spend on salaries , rent and other expenses . And some financial assets are hard for charities to accept and turn into regular money . Your local food bank , for instance , may not know what do with a stake in a private equity fund or if your rich neighbor gave it a donation in one of those ways rather than writing a check or using their credit card . That has led to the rise of a new kind of middleman with specialized expertise . got 61 percent of its donations in assets other than cash in 2017 . Other prominent donor-advised fund sponsors saw a similar result . obtained of its 2017 donations in non-cash assets . In the last month of the year , that figure was 80 percent for . These fast-growing charities bring a key skill : harvesting capital gains . That is , they accept tax-advantaged donations , hold onto that wealth , and – in most cases – derived from those assets to the donor ’ s charities of choice when the donor asks . its ability to accept privately held business interests and other assets that are not publicly traded . its ability to convert such things as stakes in private companies , fine art and bitcoin . The Silicon Valley Community Foundation is emblematic of this phenomenon taking hold in more traditional charitable organizations . It has as a repository for complex assets like stock held in companies before they go public and digital currencies . The consequences To be sure , there is nothing improper about these practices . Giving investment assets gradually became commonplace after the tax code established the favorable treatment of donations to charitable organizations . The growth in giving digital money can be traced to the IRS ruling in 2014 that the government sees it as a form of . However , many of these assets are extremely volatile . As the demonstrated , digital money ’ s value is subject to big changes . This can be a problem when donors give away assets right before their value crashes – or a boon when those gifts precede a sharp rise . Either way , wealthy donors get tax deductions . And when gifts precede crashes , it can take more tax revenue out of government coffers than charities get in theirs . Bitcoin turns ten – here ’ s how it all started and what the future might hold October 30 , 2018 3.52pm GMT University of Exeter Author Senior Lecturer in Economics , University of Exeter Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list A mysterious , anonymous entity known as “ Satoshi Nakamoto ” posted a on October 31 2008 entitled “ Bitcoin : A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System ” . It was the first time that the concept of Bitcoin entered the world . But outside of the mailing lists – those promoting the use of privacy-enhancing technology – this event was hardly noticed . Ten years on , who hasn ’ t at least heard of the cryptocurrency ? On just nine pages , the white paper explained how the Bitcoin system would work . Many attempts at electronic cash had already been made going right back to computer scientist David Chaum ’ s developed in the 1980s . Using an intricate dance of cryptography , Digicash enabled people to pay each other online anonymously , yet prevented users from sending the same money to two different people at the same time ( the so-called ) . Read more : For a while , Digicash caught on . Even the likes of , and a growing list of merchants started accepting it . Compared to the credit-based systems of Visa , Mastercard and later Paypal , at least some people could see the benefits of a currency that allowed micropayments with extremely low transactions fees . Anyone with libertarian tendencies loved the idea of using a currency outside the control of any authority . But Visa and Mastercard upped their game and won the battle for payment dominance . It seemed the struggle was over , but some cypherpunks refused to give up . Adam Back , which together with ( both cited in Nakamoto ’ s white paper ) and were the last significant efforts to create an online cash system before Bitcoin . The idea fizzled out following the dotcom bust of 2000-02 . It was only brought back to life by Nakamoto in 2008 . Nakamoto ’ s vision Previous attempts came close to creating secure digital cash , but there was always one major problem they encountered : the need for a trusted third party like a bank to maintain the system in some way . Nakamoto ’ s white paper solved this problem by distributing the process of maintaining a totally transparent public ledger ( known as the blockchain ) among a network of competing “ miners ” . As long as one miner does not control more than half of the whole network of computing power , the system is secure . Cryptography , computer science , and now crucially an elaborate system of economic incentives all came together into a mindblowing overall piece of ingenuity . The cypherpunk vision to enhance privacy , limit government power and increase its transparency had finally been realised . Or had it ? If there was any lesson to be learned from the failure of Digicash , it was that you could invent a brilliant system , but you had to convince people to use it , despite them never being able to come close to understanding how it actually works . With Bitcoin , we have seen extraordinary hype , with , and thousands of spin-off cryptocurrencies and private blockchains that are all just variations of the original . Read more : Ethereum is arguably one of the most significant spin offs . It shows how blockchain technology can be combined with , potentially providing a costless , decentralised way of replacing the colossal global army of trust-based service industries that conventional money relies on . There is , however , only one existing blockchain that is consistent with Nakamoto ’ s vision : , a so-called “ hard-fork ” of Bitcoin that generally shares the same history and protocol , except for two crucial details . The blocks on its chain are a massive 32-times larger than the original Bitcoin , and growing . More transactions per block , means lower fees per transaction , paving the way for global adoption . Plus , built-in codes that were switched off in the original Bitcoin , have been reignited , potentially allowing all the smart contract capabilities of Ethereum . Vision accomplished ? The white paper itself is not explicit about goals , but the main implicit aim is clear : to create a secure form of online cash that does not depend on a trusted third party . This has already been demonstrated as a concept . The only question that remains is , to what extent will it be adopted ? A recent clue to that question may lie right in the heart of London ’ s financial centre , Canary Wharf . Here , the Brewdog company accepting Bitcoin Cash as payment . It is cheaper for them to process payments compared to credit cards , even allowing for the cost of them having to convert Bitcoin Cash back to pounds sterling . Recently , computer companies and Microsoft have also started accepting Bitcoin Cash as payment . Further afield , more and more developing countries like South Africa are experimenting enthusiastically with new apps that store Bitcoin Cash like , which may help people who can ’ t open bank accounts . A new app developed in Spain called and an even bolder concept called hint at a whole new paradigm of automatic click-based micropayments that could also spell the end of pop-up adds appearing on popular content online . Nakamoto ’ s vision , in some sense , may have already been achieved , but will Bitcoin Cash permanently replace all fiat currencies and become ? The world wide web arrived in 1990 , and you could argue it took a dramatic collapse and 20 years before its true commercial potential could be realised . In 2028 , maybe it ’ s not unfeasible that the technology underlying Bitcoin will do the same for global money and all trust-based financial , legal and other services . More articles , written by academic experts : For more evidence-based articles by academics , subscribe to our .
Initiative Q is not the new Bitcoin , but here ’ s why the idea has value November 5 , 2018 6.47pm GMT The University of Queensland Author Researcher , The University of Queensland Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Could free units of a new digital currency end up being worth thousands of dollars ? , which is aggressively marketing itself on social media , wants you to think so . It urges you to sign up now , and get your friends to do so as well , to maximise the value of your free “ Q ” currency . This has invited comparisons to pyramid schemes and suspicions about its . It ’ s not a scam . It also won ’ t make you fabulously wealthy . It is , nonetheless , an interesting idea . I want to use – the study of the basic rules governing emerging economic systems such as cryptocurrencies – to show you how Initiative Q is an interesting experiment , criticisms of its marketing methods aside . If you sign up , you might help the world discover a remarkable new payments system . Cryptocurrency basics Initiative Q ’ s marketing explicitly draws comparisons with the best-known cryptocurrency : “ Think of it as Bitcoin seven years ago. ” The implication is this is the next Big Thing in internet money . Yet Initiative Q also states . The basic definition of a is simply any form of digital money consisting of entries in a cryptographically secure virtual ledger , rather than physical coins and notes . In this sense “ Q ” can be thought of as a cryptocurrency . However , cryptocurrency is increasingly defined further as to manage and secure the virtual ledger that records transactions . Bitcoin , for instance , uses blockchain technology to the virtual ledger across a network and the process of coming to agreement on how to update it . Blockchain protects a cryptocurrency from manipulation by hackers or governments , but it comes with costs . Read more : What makes Q different Initiative Q is not like Bitcoin in most technical respects . It will not use blockchain but control the “ true ” ledger centrally . This makes blockchain enthusiasts , because it cuts against the aversion to any one group holding power over a system . But it will avoid some costs of Bitcoin and similar cryptocurrencies . One is the feared of energy-intensive “ proof of work ” algorithms that prove to the whole network a blockchain is compiled correctly . “ Q ” will avoid that by the company deciding what is the “ true ” ledger . That also allows the company to counter fraud and resolve disputes by “ reversing ” transactions , where blockchains can typically only do this with an intensely difficult “ ” . By design the Q won ’ t fluctuate wildly in value , either . The goal is a stable private currency for payments processing rather than a vehicle for speculation . It is clearly designed with the current “ ” trend in mind . Read more : , who helped design “ Q ” , is known for advocating systems where money does not fluctuate wildly in value . He has clearly built Initiative Q around , which says the money supply should be controlled to keep prices stable . So the value of “ Q ” will not fluctuate wildly . All of this makes Initiative Q unlike Bitcoin , although it creates a private digital currency . Experiments in institutional technologies My colleagues at call cryptocurrencies “ ” . Anyone who wants to use the system has to act within the institutions it creates - that is , obey its fundamental rules . These systems can be privatised . Any private citizen with a laptop can write a protocol that administers large-scale institutional systems like money , which historically only the centralised state could enforce . Read more : For example , Bitcoin ’ s creator , , is said to have belted out the source code for the cryptocurrency on a laptop at home during spare time . Now millions of people around the world use the system to interact every day . What ’ s exciting is that this allows people to invent all sorts of different institutional systems to see which ones work best – feeding a process my colleagues have called “ ” . From this perspective , what is interesting about is that it creates a oriented around streamlined payments processing . It is supposed to take all the good things about PayPal and improve on them . Not the new Bitcoin , but still interesting One can understand why Initiative Q ’ s marketing strategy has caused it to be dismissed as a . But like any payments system , it faces “ ” . It needs lots of people to use it . The more people do , the more value it has . If it does succeed , though , it won ’ t make you fabulously wealthy . You ’ ll get something more like a gift card . The value of “ Q ” is designed to be stable , so you shouldn ’ t be expecting to become a crypto-billionaire . If you do sign up , you might at least enrich the field of institutional cryptoeconomics . Experiments like this are how we improve our institutions , through a process much like scientific discovery . The future of blockchain according to experts in the energy sector March 5 , 2019 12.12pm GMT Grenoble École de Management ( GEM ) Authors Ph.D student , Grenoble École de Management ( GEM ) Professor of Energy Economics , Grenoble École de Management ( GEM ) Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Romanian electric power transmission lines . Blockchain technology is a decentralised digital ledger that keeps public but encrypted records of peer-to-peer transactions . All members of a blockchain network can verify whether a transaction occurred or not , rendering clearinghouses or other intermediaries obsolete . The technology originally served as the backbone of bitcoin , the well-known crypto-currency , and later made its way to other industries . In France , blockchain represents a vibrant industry as the nation trailblazes the way for the technology in the hope of becoming a blockchain hub in the European Union . The French minister of finance , Bruno Le Maire , believes that : “ The blockchain will offer new opportunities to our startups , for example , with initial coin offerings that will allow them to raise funds through tokens. ” In December 2018 , two French members of Parliament , Jean-Michel Mis and Laure de La Raudière , submitted a recommending that the French Government invest 500 million euros on public blockchain endeavors over the next three years in order to build a “ blockhain nation ” . The unique characteristics of blockchain technology ( lower transaction costs , increased transparency and enhanced security ) are creating new opportunities for the French electricity sector . A few start-ups such as or are currently establishing blockchain-based projects with the main aim of further decentralizing existing energy systems . Several barriers to the wide adoption of blockchain however are yet to be overcome . Where is the blockchain headed ? In this context , the conducted by Grenoble Ecole de Management ( GEM ) in December 2018 asked experts for their opinion on where blockchain is headed in the French energy sector . As a first finding , the experts were almost equally split in their opinion on whether blockchain will play a rather important or a rather unimportant role in the French electricity system of tomorrow . To understand the importance of blockchain technology in the energy sector and the challenges that it faces , the experts were asked for their opinion on the viability of specific blockchain applications and the potential benefits , as well as the barriers currently limiting a wider diffusion of the technology in France . According to the experts , the most promising applications of blockchain technology in the electricity sector in the next five years , are “ peer-to-peer energy trading ” and “ electric vehicle charging and sharing ” . The blockchain promises to create a system whereby energy prosumers from the commercial sector or private homes can trade electricity without the interference of a central authority . With the continuous growth of electric vehicles , blockchain promises to provide an adequate , publicly available charging infrastructure that tackles the “ lack of range ” challenge , by enabling individuals to make their private EV charging stations available for public use for a fee . Currently , the majority of players in the blockchain for energy market are trying to enact some form of peer-to-peer energy trading . In 2017 , Enedis , working with the French start-up Sunchain and the Departmental Council of Pyrénées-Orientales , launched one of the first P2P energy sharing projects in France . The project , DIGISOL , explored the use of blockchain technology to share solar energy between individuals within the same building ( collective auto-consumption ) . A large-scale deployment of the technology for P2P energy trading however is still inexistent in France . Which blockchain use case do you see as most viable for applying the technology within the energy sector in France in the next five years ? Blockchain technology is interesting for its potential to decentralise energy markets and improve flexibility . blockchain enables real-time coordination of electricity supply and demand data that can improve demand-side energy efficiency . blockchain solutions can also be used to accurately monitor and control energy performance in real-time , which will ultimately increase supply side efficiency . In effect , blockchain provides companies with ways to efficiently track energy usage and generation , and to identify network anomalies , which can improve response time in case of a failure or a blackout . In France , ENGIE is exploring the use of blockchain technology to monitor water , natural gas and energy flows . The company has also partnered with different blockchain players , such as , which specializes in security and infrastructure solutions for cryptocurrencies and blockchain applications , to develop blockchain for energy market solutions . What potential benefits can blockchain bring to the energy sector in France ? However , the experts also identified key barriers that limit the widespread diffusion of blockchain technology . Unclear regulatory and legal framework Blockchain solutions are rapidly growing and innovating far ahead of existing regulations . Clear legal definitions and regulatory frameworks are needed in order to clear up the current level of uncertainty that is associated with blockchain . The French government , along with players in the blockchain ecosystem , is still working on establishing favorable regulations and legal frameworks for the technology . In December 2018 , the French Accounting Standards Authority established a regulation that defines the accounting rules applicable to Initial Coin Offerings ( ICO ; a highly popular approach to raise capital in the blockchain space ) issuers , ICO investors , and organizations that hold any type of crypto currency or crypto-asset . However , several issues such as intellectual-property , data privacy , and enforceability of contracts remain to be addressed . Electricity consumption Current blockchain designs run on algorithms that can consume up to 215 kWh per transaction ( i.e. , the equivalent of letting an incandescent light bulb of 25W burn for a full year ) . This is mainly because validating and securing transactions on the blockchain requires huge computing power . For example , the servers that run bitcoin ’ s software are estimated to use at least 22 terawatt-hours ( TWh ) per year , which is almost the level of Ireland ’ s annual electricity consumption . An expansion of blockchain will require additional “ data mining ” and consequently additional energy consumption . A number of green-mining solutions that use renewable energy sources and more energy-efficient hardware are currently being tested . The green-energy startup , which operates two hydropower mining farms in the Austrian Alps is one example . What are the main barriers that are currently limiting a wider diffusion of blockchain technology within the energy sector in France ? Technical complexity Current blockchain designs are extremely difficult to develop , deploy and maintain . For the novice user , making a transaction on the blockchain can be challenging , as it requires technical knowledge and several sophisticated steps . A number of big IT players are currently providing cloud-based blockchain services intended to automate the setup of blockchain infrastructures . Future blockchain applications may need to adopt a plug-and-play infrastructure that is much more user-friendly in order to attain wider diffusion . The energy market barometers conducted in December 2018 among 112 experts from industry , science and public administration in France asked about the role of blockchain technology in the French energy sector . The results can be found . Facebook ’ s cryptocurrency : a financial expert breaks it down March 12 , 2019 1.23pm GMT Loughborough University Author Professor of Financial Economics , Loughborough University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook is to launch its own version of Bitcoin , for use in its messaging applications , WhatsApp , Messenger and Instagram . Could this “ Facecoin ” be the long-awaited breakthrough by a global technology giant into the lucrative market for retail financial services ? Or will it be yet another exaggerated “ crypto ” project , buying into the continuing excitement about decentralised peer-to-peer exchange but , in the end , not delivering very much ? Time will tell , but my two decades of research into the economics of payments makes me sceptical . We know little about Facebook ’ s plans . So far there is just one company statement about a new group set up to look into cryptocurrencies : “ Like many other companies , Facebook is exploring ways to leverage the power of blockchain technology . This new small team is exploring many different applications . We don ’ t have anything further to share. ” Some investigative journalism from Bloomberg and the reveals a little more . Facecoin ( and the similar “ Gram ” cryptocurrency being developed by the privacy focused messaging app Telegram ) will apparently be a “ ” . Rather than having a fixed amount of currency that fluctuates in price , depending on demand , Facecoin will have a fixed price and the amount of it in circulation will vary . So unlike Bitcoin it will not be a vehicle for speculation . What will the fixed price be ? Bloomberg reports it will be fixed against the dollar . The New York Times says that it will be against a combination of dollar , euro and yen . Who will use it ? Facebook is apparently focusing on providing a technology solution for the large and lucrative remittance market for payments into India . Will transactions in Facecoin be anonymous like those in Bitcoin ? No , they will be associated with Facebook accounts , so they won ’ t be an easy means to avoid laws and regulations . Reasons to be sceptical While this is a fascinating development , some scepticism is in order . If there is one common feature to the many hundreds of crypto and blockchain finance projects announced over the past four years , it is exaggerated early claims . In one ongoing research project , I have found that of 103 projects announced since 2015 applying so-called blockchain technologies to financial services , all but a handful have quietly disappeared . None have yet been taken through to commercial-scale launch ( although around half a dozen may achieve that by 2021 ) . Is there anything about Facebook ’ s plans to suggest a different outcome ? The obvious parallel is with the Chinese payment solution WeChat Pay , globally the largest mobile and internet payment solution used by “ ” . In Beijing and Shanghai “ ” that allow passers by to scan and give them money using their smart phones . The integration into the WeChat messaging system is what gave WeChat Pay the critical mass to achieve widespread acceptance . Facecoin ’ s integration with WhatsApp and other Facebook services could support a similarly rapid take-off . But WeChat Pay doesn ’ t involve cryptocurrency . It uses established server technologies to enable people to transfer money in and out of conventional bank accounts as well as to other users . The New York Times reports , rather surprisingly , that Facecoin ( unlike WeChat Pay ) will be based on integration with cryptoexchanges , which trade conventional money for digital currencies , rather than with the conventional banking system . But given that cryptoexchanges are coming under because of their lack of transparency and irregularities in how they operate , linking with them is hardly likely to encourage people to adopt Facecoin . It is also difficult to make sense of the intended use of Facecoin for remittances . Major banks already send dollars virtually instantaneously and costlessly from one country to another . Costs and inefficiencies arise in when converting funds to local currency and allocating them to a local bank account or for cash collection . The Facecoin technology will do nothing to address these problems . Who pays out ? Another question mark is about the backing for Facecoin . Unlike Bitcoin , which is not pegged to any other currency , Facecoin will need the backing of real money to maintain its fixed price . The safest approach will be full reserving : for every $ 1 of Facecoin issued , Facebook could hold $ 1 of reserves in a segregated account . is also possible but who then guarantees the safety of those reserves ? If reserves do not cover withdrawals , who is then responsible and what compensation is there for holders of Facecoin ? Facebook would need a banking licence and subject itself to the full burden of banking regulation . Ideally , reserves would be held with a central bank . But central banks will be reluctant to support a private currency . Perhaps the biggest reason for scepticism comes from the challenges Facebook already faces over user data , privacy and authenticity . If Facebook takes as big a role in daily payments as it already has in personal communications and social media , then it will become an even bigger target for the growing anti-trust movement that seeks to the tech giants . Fundamental change is possible . Cryptocurrency technologies to eliminate the instability of fractionally reserved banking . But this will have to be through a state currency replacing fractionally reserved bank transaction accounts and not through a private currency . It would probably be wiser for Facebook to outsource Facecoin to an established international bank . But then , of course , this wouldn ’ t be such a major disruption of established financial services . The world ’ s newest country ? With cryptocurrency launch , Facebook sets its path toward becoming an independent nation June 18 , 2019 9.53pm BST Syracuse University Author Assistant Professor of Communications ( Social Media ) & Magazine , News and Digital Journalism , Syracuse University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook has announced a plan to launch , adding another layer to its efforts to dominate global communications and business . including Visa , Spotify , eBay , PayPal and Uber – plus a ready-made around the world – Facebook is positioned to pressure countries and central banks to cooperate with its . In my view as a , Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is clearly seeking to give his company even more , despite the potential dangers to society at large . In a sense , he is declaring that he wants Facebook to become a virtual nation , populated by users , powered by a self-contained economy , and headed by a CEO – Zuckerberg himself – who is . Facebook in the past , and is still wrestling with significant public concerns – and investigations – about its , and . Therefore , it ’ s important to see through the hype . People must , and whether they are doing it in the best interests of humankind – or whether they are just seeking to benefit the new class of elite technology executives . Humanity needs ethical leadership , and time to think through the potential repercussions of rapid technological change . That ’ s why , in my view , Facebook ’ s cryptocurrency by financial regulators until its design has been proved to be safe for all of global society . Understanding Libra Technology companies are interested in a . That could allow companies like Facebook and Twitter to bring in more users to their platforms , and from the new system . They also want to . That sector is worth , is enormously profitable , and yet has . The technical details of Facebook ’ s plans are still emerging , but it seems that the company is not seeking to compete with or other . Rather , Facebook is looking to replace the existing with an all-new setup , with Libra at its center . The company may be counting on increased public interest in , and its market strength , to overcome objections . However , I don ’ t believe Facebook should be allowed to like it has , as many see it , . Speeding global exchange There is definitely a need for ways to , and to provide access to financial services to the many . There is real potential to Libra , but there are likely to be ways to improve even more , developing a payment system that better serves the world as a whole . At least at the moment , the Libra is being designed as a form of . That has that Libra might someday be recognized as a sovereign currency , with Facebook acting as a “ ” that could compete with the central banks of countries around the world . It doesn ’ t help that Facebook is already positioning itself to evade by that will join an for the Libra . To protect consumers , regulators should look carefully at whether the new system supporting the Libra is sound . It may be that an entirely new set of financial rules and regulations is needed to shield the existing financial system from harm if the Libra becomes more popular than national currencies . At the very least , governments need to proceed slowly and carefully when new products may introduce systemic risks into our environment . Even the has acknowledged that . In my opinion , Libra ’ s planned launch in 2020 does not allow enough time to fully vet this technology and its risks . Protecting the global financial system Financial regulations have developed over time to encourage , and to protect regular customers from fraudsters and corporate greed . There are also rules that help governments prevent and detect . This is not to say that all payments and purchases should be tied to a . and is key to privacy and personal freedoms . As new digital financial services , methods of electronic payment and currencies develop and become popular , they should not be allowed to undermine longstanding , even in the name of smoother , cheaper transactions . My concern is not just about large-volume transactions . Facebook has shown how even small amounts of money can buy with the power to influence public opinion and election outcomes in the U.S. and around the world . Product design and risk assessment Facebook has a long history of . The public , and their representatives in government – including elected officials , financial regulators and – should carefully scrutinize all aspects of Facebook ’ s cryptocurrency plans . This concern is especially urgent because Facebook also has a long history of launching products and services , like political ads and , without fully considering their potential to damage democracy and the global society at large . The company has demonstrated its inability to serve society beneficially – and it . All the signals suggest that customers and regulators alike should carefully examine whether Facebook ’ s Libra is or just a way to avoid restrictions on a potentially hazardous financial product . Defending democracy Facebook ’ s entrance into the financial industry is a threat to democracies and their citizens around the world , on the same scale as disinformation and information warfare , which also depend on social media for their effectiveness . It may be hard for world leaders to understand that this is an emergency , as they can not see the virtual powers aligning against them . But they must huddle quickly to – and keep – the from technology companies ’ greed . It will be key to understand if Facebook ’ s future cryptocurrency will ultimately function more like anonymous cash , or more like a traceable credit card transaction . Facebook has the blockchain and encryption technology to create an anonymous digital cash-like system , or a private digital currency , . Anonymity would heighten the risks of abuse such as money laundering , so it ’ s worth watching out for a cash-like Facebook cryptocurrency that mirrors the central banks ’ cash system . In addition , I can not help but reflect on the name that Facebook chose for this , the Libra , which is a , once used to mint coins . In many ways the company that Mark Zuckerberg is building is beginning to look more like a Roman Empire , now with its own central bank and currency , than a corporation . The only problem is that this new nation-like platform is a controlled company and is run more like a than a sovereign country with democratically elected leaders . Even now , the company may have as some countries – and . In the wake of the not too distant , and the “ fake news ” and disinformation culture that is developing , people must slow down and fully evaluate disruptive technology of this magnitude . Society can not withstand a launch of a cryptocurrency in Facebook ’ s infamous “ ” style . Facebook offers lofty ideals for its digital currency . Facebook claims Libra offers economic empowerment to billions – an economist is skeptical June 18 , 2019 10.54pm BST Boston University Author Senior lecturer , Boston University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list the cryptocurrency craze . Should we be concerned ? The social network site on June 18 said called with the help of 27 partners , including MasterCard , Visa , ebay and Uber . In simple terms , Libra is meant to replace the paper bills in your wallet or purse with a digital equivalent . But unlike other cryptocurrencies like bitcoin , Libra will be directly backed by assets . describing the vision for this new currency is filled with laudable goals such as creating economic opportunity and advancing financial inclusion . But it will take time to completely understand the ramifications of Libra , which Facebook . As a , I believe there are economic benefits to Facebook ’ s cryptocurrency – but also some big potential downsides . The benefits of Libra Existing cryptocurrencies are not tied to physical assets . This makes them immune to the whims of national governments but also makes them prone to speculative bubbles and flash crashes . Libra , on the other hand , is going to be 100 % backed by assets . Every unit of Libra currency will be backed by an of bank deposits and short-term government securities in various major currencies . As a result , Libra will not suffer wild price fluctuations . And since it will be backed by a collection of international currencies and assets , it won ’ t be tied to the fortunes and policies of one country either . Another effect of being backed by assets is that it may help lower the risk of high inflation in countries across the world . made this very point in his book “ . ” Hayek believed everyone would be better off if people could pick among different types of private money , like Libra , instead of using government-issued money . Hayek believed issuing private money would banish inflation from the world since people would only use the currency most stable in value . A second economic benefit of Libra is that it will likely reduce the cost of transferring money around the world because the marginal cost of using it will be so low and Facebook is so prevalent , with about . As I have pointed out before , travelers and migrants to move money from one country to another . In a testament to the expected impact of Libra on the average cost of sending money , Facebook ’ s announcement – a major mover of money internationally – plummeting . The risks of a cash-free society If Libra is a success , it will surely speed up the movement toward more countries becoming . While some , such as Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg , may favor this outcome , I believe there are two important downsides to going cash-free . One is that it disenfranchises the , who would be pushed further to the margins of society and possibly become unable to take part in modern commerce . Although the price of an individual virtual currency transaction may be lower , there are still many nontrivial costs necessary to connecting to the digital society . For starters , you will need a smart phone and an internet connection to use Libra , both of which come with regular costs and fees . Concerns over disenfranchisement have lead to places like , and the laws to ban cashless stores . Second , a cashless society makes a country ’ s entire economy more vulnerable to disruptions . That ’ s because a cash-free economy depends on several things always working : a stable supply of electricity , constant communications networks and robust security . If one fails , digital transactions won ’ t work . Two recent news stories impressed on me just how vulnerable the power grid is . The U.S. government recently acknowledged that it ’ s deploying that could cripple it . That ’ s because the are already inside America ’ s power grid . Of course , there doesn ’ t need to be nefarious intent to see widespread power outages . Recently the in and . Tens of millions people were , and some had no power for a day . The same thing has happened in . Software viruses or accidents that shut down the electrical grid may not be lethal to humans but they can kill a cashless economy . Will Libra lives up to and empower billions of people ? Time will tell but meanwhile call me a skeptic . But the consequences of one day relying entirely on ones and zeroes to power our economies is worrisome . Libra could become more successful than other cryptocurrencies because it has the backing of multiple large international corporations . The lowdown on Libra : what consumers need to know about Facebook ’ s new cryptocurrency June 27 , 2019 6.24am BST Griffith University Author Associate Professor , Griffith University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrencies have become a global phenomenon in the past few years . Now Facebook is launching it ’ s own cryptocurrency , in association with Visa , MasterCard , Uber and others . The stated aim of is to “ enable a simple global currency and financial infrastructure that empowers billions of people ” . The announcement has sparked fears that Libra could be , warnings to be , and of claims that it will help developing countries . But let ’ s go back to the basics and look at what Libra is , how it compares to other cryptocurrencies and whether you should be concerned about using it when it eventually arrives . Read more : What is a cryptocurrency ? Currency is a system of money that is commonly used in exchange for goods and services and , as a result , holds value . Cryptocurrencies are digital currencies that are secured using cryptography . The more popular recent cryptocurrencies are based on blockchain technology which uses a cryptographic structure that is difficult to change . One of the key properties of this structure is a distributed ledger that keeps account of financial transactions , which anyone can access . What is Libra ? Libra is a new currency that is being proposed by Facebook . It ’ s considered a cryptocurrency because cryptography will be used to help protect the value of the currency from tampering – such as double spending – and to protect the payment process . Libra has the potential to become successful because of the backing from the , which is made up of large international corporations such as Facebook , Uber and Vodafone . MasterCard and Visa have also thrown their hats in the ring , but no traditional banks are on the list . What ’ s different about Libra compared with other cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin ? Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum are quite egalitarian in nature . That ’ s because there is no single authority that verifies transactions between parties , so anyone could potentially do it . To authorise a Bitcoin transaction you would have to prove that you have done the work , known as a “ ” . For Bitcoin , the proof of work is to solve a mathematical puzzle . People who successfully solve the puzzle ( proving they have done some work ) , can add transactions to the blockchain distributed ledger and are rewarded with Bitcoins . The process is known as mining . The good thing about this is that it reduces fraud . Since anyone can potentially mine Bitcoins , it ’ s harder to collude as you wouldn ’ t know who the next person to mine a coin would be . And it ’ s simple to verify that the person is authorised because anyone can check that the puzzle has been solved correctly . Based on the , it sounds like the difference with Libra is that it will verify transactions using a consensus system known as “ ” , or a variation of this method . Under this system , transactions would be authorised by a group of people who have a stake or ownership in the currency . This makes it easier to predict who the next person to authorise a transaction might be ( since there are a relatively small number of authorising group members ) , and then collude to launder funds without other group members knowing . It the criteria to become a founding member of the Libra Association is to contribute a minimum of US $ 10 million entrance fee , have a large amount of money in the bank and be able to influence a large number of people . Read more : What are banks and regulators worried about ? Cryptocurrencies affect governments and tax systems since they have little to no transaction costs when money is transferred across borders . So while the low transaction costs would be good for everyday users , the advent of a new cryptocurrency with a potentially very large user base has governments and traditional banks very concerned . While Libra is open source – meaning the source code is available for all to view , use and modify – it ’ s the members of the association who will be overseeing the currency . Libra could herald a shift away from traditional government taxes and banking fees to a new international monetary system controlled by corporate entities like Facebook and Uber . That ’ s a concern because of the lack of oversight from regulatory bodies . What should everyday people expect from Libra ? The backing of software giants means it ’ s likely that the user interface for Libra coins would be smooth and simple to use . Low transaction costs would benefit users and the Libra Association promises to control the value of the currency so that it does not fluctuate as much as other cryptocurrencies . It ’ s unclear how they plan to do this . But value stability would be a great advantage in times of uncertainty . What are the risks ? The everyday consumer probably wouldn ’ t know the difference between the “ proof of work ” and the “ proof of stake ” mechanisms . But since Facebook has a large database of users that are known to use Libra , it may be able to link Libra transactions to individuals . This could be a privacy concern . ( Bitcoin transactions are anonymous because account numbers used in Bitcoin transactions are not linked to an individual ’ s identity . ) Recent cybersecurity have contributed to a growing awareness of the vulnerabilities of IT systems . As with all software , the Libra implementation and management could be vulnerable to attack , which in turn could mean users could lose their money . But that is a risk that all cryptocurrency users face , whether they are aware of it or not . Read more : What steps could consumers take to protect themselves ? No matter what cryptocurrency you choose to use , your funds are still accessible through the same interfaces : a web page or a mobile app . And the way you control access to your personal funds is by authenticating with a password . Make sure you keep your password safe by making sure it is complicated and hard to guess . Look for applications that allow you to use two-factor authentication and make sure it ’ s turned on . Libra is yet to prove its claims of making financial transactions safe and convenient . Only time will tell if its uptake will become widespread following its expected launch next year . With no physical form , the cryptocurrency Bitcoin is difficult to analyse and its trading patterns challenging to discern . The answer to forecasting Bitcoin may lie in artificial intelligence July 1 , 2019 1.57pm BST University of Guelph Author Professor , Finance , University of Guelph Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list As it held in late 2017 when it nearly reached US $ 20,000 in value , investors are still questioning how to predict such a volatile currency . As a cryptocurrency , there is no physical form that gives Bitcoin value , so it is impossible to perform traditional fundamental analysis of the currency . Consequently , many investors track the so-called ( geometric patterns constructed from historical prices and trading volumes ) in order to understand and predict Bitcoin ’ s future movement . Some researchers have found success with . But these sometimes have hundreds of variables ( or predictors ) and it is difficult to determine key factors or test the replicability of such approaches . It ’ s also hard to understand what factors really drive Bitcoin fluctuations on the market . For over 20 years , I have been researching . At the Lang School of Business and Economics at the University of Guelph , my co-author and former graduate student Robert Adcock and I to test the predictability of Bitcoin prices . Predicting fluctuations We used technical indicators called moving averages as predictors . Moving averages are constructed by averaging prices over a period of time ( e.g . 50 or 200 days ) and plotting them as a line along with the prices . The rationale for using moving averages is that if the price of Bitcoin today becomes greater or lower than the average price over the past 50 or 200 days , traders could expect the emergence of an upward or downward trend . If Bitcoin is unpredictable , then our model is not expected to beat the model — essentially , it is no better than guessing . However , our regarding Bitcoin ’ s predictability over time and during bouts of unusual volatility . Artificial intelligence forecasts Using daily observations from 2011-2018 , we created an ANN with three predictors : returns , 50-day buy-sell signal and 200-day buy-sell signal . We also tested an ANN model that included the to see if stock market volatility had any noticeable effect on Bitcoin movements . The as based on the . Higher values of VIX indicate that the market will make a large swing . Artificial neural networks operate in a similar way to the basic functioning of the human brain . Our model takes predictors , or inputs , and outputs ( the daily price change of Bitcoin ) and attempts to learn a pattern from all the data . It continues to test its patterns until it reaches an optimal point where further testing is redundant . These advanced models form the backbone of many . By combining Bitcoin technical analysis and neural networks , we hoped that the ANN would find a pattern among the data that allowed us to more accurately predict future returns . Non-traditional investors Our ANN model did indeed succeed in reducing the prediction error of the random walk by about five to 10 per cent over the full observation period . These forecast improvements are statistically significant , indicating that predicting Bitcoin prices on a daily basis is no longer guesswork . Our results show that Bitcoin is unaffected by how the stock market changes , which suggests that traditional market investors and investors in Bitcoin are two distinct groups . We also separated the data into four subsamples of similar time frames to further zoom in on market inefficiencies . Our ANN ’ s predictive performance improved further within these subsamples . One subsample , running from October 2014 to June 2016 , provided the best results of the study . The isolated 200-day signal model outperformed the random walk by 43.55 per cent . We noted that this subsample had low volatility compared to the other three subsamples and was the steadiest period of data we observed . In essence , greater market volatility makes learning data patterns and training of the ANN model more difficult . Along with price accuracy , we also observed how often our ANN models correctly predicted whether prices would increase or decrease . Our main comprehensive model over the entire 2011-2018 period had nearly 63 per cent prediction accuracy . Put differently , Bitcoin trading with our model would be on average more profitable than placing random buy and sell orders that have a 50 per cent chance of making a profit . Speculation and predictive bubbles Compared to other predictive models , our ANN provided the most accurate and reliable predictive method for Bitcoin . We concluded that the historical evolution of daily Bitcoin prices followed predictive trends ( or bubbles ) that potentially arise from the speculative nature of cryptocurrency trading . Read more : We believe that the future of forecasting Bitcoin — and perhaps investing in general — lies in the abilities of artificial intelligence and artificial neural networks . While people may argue over the merits of Bitcoin as a currency , we can at least appreciate it as a fascinating — and now easier-to-predict — commodity . Libra , Iran and the potential end of cryptocurrencies as we know them July 1 , 2019 2.24pm BST The Open University Author Senior Lecturer in Law , The Open University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook ’ s new cryptocurrency , libra , is being heralded as the moment that cryptocurrencies and blockchain , the technology that supports them , . A notable in the run up to the libra announcement on June 18 , and since , suggests a market directly responding to this possibility and bolstered by it . Of course , the price of bitcoin is known to rise and fall sharply . Yet there is no doubt that having one of the world ’ s largest and most influential corporations throwing its weight behind the technology will calm nerves and build confidence . More importantly , it gives legitimacy to the idea that cryptocurrencies and blockchain are here to stay . And , as I have argued in my research , must be , not least by . Read more : In the same moment the world is introduced to libra , tensions between the United States and Iran continue to grow , with increasing US sanctions against Iran . The two are not directly connected , but libra ( or other cryptocurrencies ) could offer Iran a route round its sanctions . This , of course , is not something Facebook intends – but Iran ’ s interest in cryptocurrencies could have a serious influence on libra ’ s future . A troubled past In their contemporary forms , bitcoin and blockchain have been around for . In this time cryptocurrencies have proliferated wildly . According to the cryptocurrency platform , , there are now at least 2,248 different kinds of tokens . Many of these are actively and enthusiastically exchanged and traded by a growing number of people . The recent history of cryptocurrencies , and bitcoin specifically , has not been all that positive . Famously , in 2013 , the following an FBI investigation . The site ’ s founder , Ross Ulbricht , was imprisoned for life . Silk Road users relied heavily on bitcoin to ensure anonymity , and the libertarian ethos underpinning bitcoin appeared to fit well with Silk Road ’ s rejection and evasion of authority and regulation . What was so attractive for many about Silk Road , bitcoin and aspects of blockchain technology in general , was the fact that together they enable people to side step the usual legal constraints and regulations that apply online and offline when it comes to financial transactions . The anonymity bitcoin offers enables people to buy and sell without detection . Read more : Silk Road offered a form of freedom to its users they were unlikely to have enjoyed previously . But this , of course , put it at loggerheads with laws and regulations in most countries and jurisdictions . While the Silk Road marketplace is now gone , cryptocurrency and blockchain are attracting more interest than ever before . At the same time governmental oversight of the technology . Although things may be about to change . Crypto-Iran Iran has long recognised the benefits of around crypto-assets and blockchain technology to counter US sanctions . This has included attempts to develop its own . That Iran might use Facebook ’ s new cryptocurrency libra to dance around US sanctions , a la Silk Road , is entirely speculative . Given Facebook ’ s contentious track record on the management of in recent years , and the fact that it is yet to convince of the legitimacy of its project , Iran , let alone billions of Facebook users , may not even get a chance to use libra at all . Read more : However , the potential for Iran to use libra raises serious questions about the level of control that should be demanded over cryptocurrency use . Robust state or corporate oversight of the technology ( or perhaps a troubling blend of the two , ) , could kill , once and for all , the that blockchains and cryptocurrencies have long encapsulated . Facebook may well find stiff opposition to libra based on the vagaries of financial regulations . But it could well face stiffer opposition both politically , from governments who don ’ t want their foreign policies undermined – and commercially , from users not getting the empowering financial infrastructure , but , instead , a heavily controlled one . Iran ’ s interest in cryptocurrencies encapsulates how , in today ’ s world , the empowerment and transparency that many advocates of cryptocurrencies and blockchains like to think is only a piece of code away is little more than a . Something always seems to spoil the party . Blockchain has been celebrated as a technology to circumvent authority and regulation – the role of bitcoin in Silk Road and its continued is evidence of this . Put simply , Iran is just another example of wanting to avoid the authorities . But this could be a step too far for authorities . And this could have a serious effect on all cryptocurrencies – not just Facebook ’ s libra . If the perception in the US and elsewhere is that Iran intends to use the technology , this could require a significant rethink regarding the future of cryptocurrencies and blockchains . It won ’ t mean the end of them , certainly not . But if this is the moment the technology truly became mainstream , then it could equally be the moment it finally yields to control and regulation – and the end of founder “ ” . Libra could be a solution , but for some it may also look a lot like a problem . Calibra has little to do with the ideals behind blockchain . The digital wallet is more like a traditional bank account . All the hype around Libra is a red herring . Facebook ’ s main game is Calibra July 8 , 2019 5.49am BST Australian National University Author Blockchain Researcher & Lecturer Data Analysis , Australian National University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Amid the hype around Facebook ’ s plan to launch its own cryptocurrency , Libra , there ’ s one big question . How is the company going to profit from it ? The project relies on developing blockchain technology . But blockchain ’ s whole raison d'être is to challenge the way corporate capitalism and businesses like Facebook make money . Facebook has also established , with several dozen equally capitalistic partners , the , a nonprofit organisation based in Switzerland , to spearhead the venture . Read more : After years of copping criticism for questionable business practices , has Facebook decided to take an altruistic turn ? Probably not . It ’ s more likely that blockchain , and even Libra , is a means to a end ; it ’ s about Facebook wanting to be not only the world ’ s biggest social media platform but also the globe ’ s go-to marketplace , putting Amazon , eBay , Apple and Google in the shade . To appreciate why this suggestion isn ’ t also hyperbole , we need to talk not so much about Libra but its companion technology , the “ custodial wallet ” called Calibra . Blockchain , but not blockchain First , let ’ s do a quick recap of some fundamentals . In 2008 , a person or group calling themselves Satoshi Nakamoto proposed a method for transacting over the internet without a trusted third party such as a bank . It uses a distributed ledger known as a blockchain and cryptography to maintain a tamper-proof record of ownership of electronic cash – hence the term cryptocurrency . Blockchain ’ s core innovation is to do away with the need for trusted entities like banks . So how do people safely send or receive cryptocurrency ? Well , they can use a “ cryptocurrency wallet ” . A cryptocurrency balance is recorded against a blockchain address . Proving ownership depends on a secret code ( or “ private key ” ) known only to the owner . The “ wallet ” is essentially software that allows people to manage their private keys and authorise transactions . Facebook has other ideas for its cryptocurrency . The Libra Association says it wants to “ ” . Tapping addresses and secret codes into a wallet interface every time wouldn ’ t be that easy . These codes can be long – up to 64 characters , compared to 16 for a credit card . So Facebook will instead provide a “ custodial wallet ” – Calibra . It will be the custodian of your cryptocurrency , much like a bank is custodian of your money , and thus manage your wallet for you . Facebook can certainly argue that this makes it much easier to use Libra – and it wants to make Libra easy to use so you can buy items through Facebook and its other platforms , such as Whatsapp and Instagram . But this aspect has little to do with the original ideals behind blockchain . It makes Calibra more like a bank , with a record of your electronic payments . It will know everything you buy or sell through its wallet ; and it “ Calibra customer data with managed vendors and service providers — including Facebook ” . How Facebook monetises data Why is this important ? Because Facebook is in the business of gathering your personal data . It now uses this information to make from selling advertising – US $ 14.9 billion in the first quarter of 2019 alone . Its value as an advertising delivery mechanism comes not just from its sheer number of users ( 1.56 billion daily users , and 2.37 billion monthly users ) but from what it knows about them . This goes way beyond basic personal details like your birthdate . Almost everything about Facebook is designed to get you to reveal personal information . You do this through what you post and the posts you like or respond to . You do this even when not directly using Facebook . Lots of online stores report back to Facebook when you visit them , for example . Read more : Identifying key personality traits can be used to predict purchasing behaviour – or political preference , as demonstrated in the Cambridge Analytica controversy . The British-based political consultancy bragged it effectively swung the US 2016 election to Donald Trump by using Facebook to harvest user data and then directing customised political messages to users ’ newsfeeds . Read more : While there is some scepticism about Cambridge Analytica ’ s electoral impact , it is generally agreed the process of “ micro-targeting ” can be very effective for marketers . So the more information Facebook has about you , the more money it can potentially make by influencing you . Becoming bigger than Amazon There ’ s more . Facebook ’ s value as an advertising powerhouse has made its founder , Mark Zuckerberg , extremely wealthy – worth an estimated US $ 73 billion . But that ’ s less than half of Amazon ’ s founder , Jeff Bezos , who ’ s worth US $ 158 billion . Both companies are in the business of helping merchants sell products . But Amazon ’ s position as an online marketplace is more lucrative than Facebook ’ s role as a shop window . Amazon can take a cut from every sale . Its retail business makes up about of its value , which is greater than Facebook ’ s total value of . What if Facebook could be both the shop window and the cash register ? What if it no longer just introduced users to merchants but also became the digital marketplace supporting those merchants ? What if it could collect not just social data but also buyer history data ? This is what Libra , and more critically , Calibra , could mean for Facebook . Libra ’ s an important part of this picture . But it ’ s Calibra that could deliver the data Facebook needs to become possibly the most valuable , and powerful , online company in the world . Facebook ’ s Libra : it ’ s not the ‘ crypto ’ that ’ s the issue , it ’ s the organisation behind it August 6 , 2019 2.44pm BST University of California , Irvine University of Bristol Authors Professor of Anthropology and Law , University of California , Irvine Lecturer in Management , University of Bristol Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The founding partners of the Libra Association . In all the hype that has surrounded its Libra currency , Facebook has been able to distract attention away from an important issue . Libra is being hyped as Facebook ’ s bitcoin but it ’ s really a proposal for a global payments system . And that system will be controlled by a small and exclusive club of private firms . Since it was announced in June , politicians and regulators have attacked Libra , citing . Libra is not a cryptocurrency – at least , not as they have been put into practice so far , where a distributed , decentralised community participates in transaction verification . Libra is essentially a prepaid digital token , backed one-to-one with a basket of reserve currencies . It is “ minted ” when people put up state-issued currencies to buy it . Read more : What ’ s important here is not the technological innovation . Facebook is proposing , in Libra , a new form of organisation . We already have payment systems controlled by private companies – Visa , MasterCard , Venmo or PayPal , which provide the infrastructure or “ rails ” for transferring value – and Libra might turn into another such rail . But its promoters have . Based on our research on the , we see similarities between Libra and Visa . But it ’ s the differences with the Visa network that raise the biggest warning flags . Learning from Visa Libra will be controlled and maintained by the , a membership-based group . Libra ’ s developers have voiced a commitment to letting anyone become a member of the association , including users like you and me . The trumpets the importance of decentralisation . But it also admits that , “ as of today we do not believe that there is a proven solution that can deliver the scale , stability , and security needed to support billions of people and transactions across the globe ” through a truly open , decentralised system . We believe Libra ’ s founders got the idea from . Hock was heralded as a visionary in his day , like Steve Jobs or Mark Zuckerberg today . He realised that the problem facing payments between banks was not technological , but organisational . When setting up Visa , it was important for Hock that Visa would not be owned by self-interested shareholders . Instead , it was the users , banks and credit unions , who “ owned ” Visa as a cooperative membership organisation . Ownership here did not entail the right to sell shares , but an irrevocable right of participation – to jointly decide on the rules of the game and Visa ’ s future . The incentive was to create a malleable but durable payment infrastructure from which all members would benefit in the long term . To work , everyone had to give something up – including their own branding on credit cards , subordinating their marks to Visa . This was a really big deal . But Hock convinced the network ’ s initial members that the payoff would come from the new market in payment services they would create . He was right . For most of its existence , until it went public in 2016 , Visa was an anomalous creature : a for-profit , non-stock corporation based on the principle of self-organisation , embodying both chaos and order . Hock even coined a term for it : . Libra envisions a similar collaborative organisation among the founding members of its Libra Association . But it turns Hock ’ s principles upside down . The Libra Association is all about ownership and control by its members as a club . Big barriers to entry And the Libra Association is a club with very high barriers to entry . An entity has to invest at least US $ 10m in Libra or have more than US $ 1 billion in market value , among other criteria . The initial tilts toward groups that have shown strong opposition to government interference and oversight . Tellingly , there are no regulated financial entities – like banks and fund managers – in the mix . The membership represents a self-selecting crème de la crème of global tech and . Association membership guarantees a share of future profits proportionate to a member ’ s stake in the system . Unlike Visa , members do not compete with one another for market share . Instead , they will passively collect rent from interest made on investing in the Libra reserve basket . Plus , profits are not shared with users , and no interest is paid on the balance held by individuals . Read more : Being a club member also affords the right to vote – again , a lot like Visa . But , unlike Visa , Libra gives voting right power based on investment level , not participation . This is not democratic ; it is a plutocracy , where the wealthiest rule . And , as profits are linked solely to interest on the association ’ s reserve funds , those managing it may well become riskier and more speculative over time . Libra ’ s white paper outlines an organisation that could become a decentralised , participatory system like Hock envisioned Visa would become . But Libra , if it is successful , will likely become an undemocratic behemoth . Alarm bells ring about a global currency ’ s de facto governance by a private , exclusive club serving the purposes of its investor-owners , not the public good . Governments have long been suspicious of private currencies for good reasons , and Libra is no exception . We must not be distracted by its proposed technical complexity , and instead , focus on how this technology is organised , put to work , and how its rewards are distributed . The good news is that Facebook ’ s play for money may at last prompt politicians to regulate tech giants to curb their impact on and influence over society . Recent revelations about the lack of privacy protections in place at the companies involved in Facebook ’ s new Libra crytocurrency raise concerns about how much trust users can place in Libra . Buyer beware : How Libra differs from Bitcoin September 19 , 2019 11.13pm BST University of Calgary Author Associate Professor , University of Calgary Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook , the largest social network in the world , stunned the world earlier this year with . The launch has raised questions about the difference between Libra and existing cryptocurrencies , as well as the implications of private companies competing with sovereign countries in issuing currencies . Unlike , which has neither an owner nor a controlling body , Libra will be governed by a Swiss foundation comprised of several members that are well-established brands , including Uber , Visa and PayPal . Read more : Libra operates within a much more controlled environment relative to many other cryptos like Bitcoin . It also doesn ’ t Instead , the book-keeping of Libra transactions is bestowed upon a set of trusted computing nodes controlled by the members of the Libra foundation . In contrast , Bitcoin is a free-for-all where anybody can join the group of computers that verify transactions . This difference in governance structure has wide-ranging implications for the economic gains and possible risks society faces from a possible widespread adoption of new currencies like Libra . How to grow ? A fundamental issue most fintech companies face today is scaleability . The Visa network can authorize up to , while Bitcoin typically processes a few hundred thousand a day . Technically , it ’ s possible to expand the Bitcoin network to a commercially viable scale , but due to the lack of a governing body , several attempts to increase capacity have ended up in endless debates , fights within the community and different camps going their own ways . It ’ s resulted in the creation of offspring currencies such as and . Libra overcomes these struggles by a well-defined governance structure where necessary technical adaptations can be efficiently decided upon in an organized manner . But Libra decision-makers may be tempted to put their own best interests ahead of the consumers ’ benefit . Recent revelations about the lack of privacy protections in place at the companies on Libra ’ s foundation raise concerns about how much trust users can place in Libra when they ’ re deciding whether to open up their financial transactions to the big internet companies on Libra ’ s board . Intimate knowledge of people ’ s purchases , wealth and shopping behaviour has incredible value for advertising and resale to other companies . It will be up to the consortium members to credibly convince the public that they will refrain from monetizing this huge wealth of data that they sit upon . Guard against fraud In our traditional financial system , laws and regulators watch over privacy as well as access to the financial system . Laws not only provide privacy protections , they also guard against fraud and ensure that citizens can participate on a level playing field . Rules are created in a democratic process . Banks in western countries can not easily ban citizens from basic financial services , which are important to join the workforce and get established in society . But currencies issued by private companies do not face the same scrutiny . What if Facebook decides you can not have Libra because you posted a critical article on the internet ? Your legal options would be limited . Bitcoin ’ s chaotic governance structure has an advantage here . Without a governing body , there is nobody who can lock anybody else out of the system . While this approach ensures equal access , however , it also invites criminals to use Bitcoin for illicit purposes . Centuries ago , promissory notes and were brought to Europe by Marco Polo as an early banking service that allowed merchants to travel without large sums of money due to fear they ’ d be robbed . Banks offered safekeeping for money , allowing the merchant to store the funds and withdraw them whenever and wherever needed . Today , banks still spend billions of dollars on security to protect their clients ’ savings . Many credit-card companies provide protection against fraudulent transactions . No such protections exist for cryptocurrencies . No recourse is possible should a hacker gain access to your wallet or if your crypto becomes worthless . With cryptocurrencies , users must once again worry about safekeeping . Deposit insurance Often under-appreciated , but of great importance , is government-provided that provides a second layer of security , protecting depositors against the default of the bank . Unlike Bitcoin , where prices fluctuate dramatically within a few days , Libra ’ s value is tied to a basket of international currencies . As users buy Libra with fiat currency , including Canadian dollars , the Libra foundation will take these dollars and invest them in safe securities . Because Libra is backed with real and stable financial assets , the value of Libra will then also be stable . While this approach sounds great at a first glance , several problems exist that have plagued banking for centuries . Temptations will arise to invest some of the money in riskier securities for a higher return . What if people , for some reason or another , doubt that the assets are there or think that the assets lost value ? Long lines of depositors wanting to withdraw their funds from a bank that they rightfully or wrongfully believe to be troubled have been observed ever since the inception of banks . Such bank runs are often self-fulfilling , and Libra is not immune to this problem . When users want to cash out , Libra would have to sell their assets at a large scale , causing the price of these very assets to fall and hence end up with insufficient funds to pay all investors . As users realize what is happening , more will want to cash out , speeding up the vicious circle . Would any government come to the rescue ? Unlike with banks , it ’ s unclear how possible losses will be covered and how they might be shared among users . Some U.S. money market funds that are in a similar business — investing client ’ s money in safe short-term assets — found themselves in similar trouble in the and were bailed out by the government . With Libra , it ’ s unclear which government would come to the rescue , if any . All the money that users will put into Libra will be missed in the traditional banking system , where banks can put deposits to good use by providing loans to productive companies that generate value and employment . The economic consequences therefore could be far-reaching . The foundation for Libra ’ s model and possible success is the banking sector ’ s shortcomings and inefficiencies . While Libra might not offer many advantages to users in Western countries , it will open access to financial services for millions of people around the world without bank accounts . Cross-border payments are in the current system ridiculously expensive and slow . Traditional banking often seems bureaucratic and technologically outdated . All these issues could be fixed by banks , but it will take outside pressure of new fintech startups to get it done . [ Deep knowledge , daily . . ] Facebook ’ s Libra cryptocurrency can still take off and revolutionise money October 18 , 2019 1.12pm BST Manchester Metropolitan University Authors Senior Lecturer , Finance , Manchester Metropolitan University Research Fellow in Economics , Manchester Metropolitan University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook ’ s Libra cryptocurrency has suffered a few setbacks recently . As well as facing , seven of its 28 founding members have – including high profile firms PayPal , Visa , Mastercard , eBay and Stripe . It leaves 21 companies in the Libra Association , the organisation . But Facebook is big enough to launch Libra on its own , so why are these members even needed ? After all , it is Facebook ’ s network of 1.59 billion daily active users that form the foundation of its business case to issue a non-sovereign currency . Why share the spoils ? The answer may be twofold . First , by having a council of members this enables Facebook to claim decentralisation status – a key tenet of any cryptocurrency . It ’ s a far cry from the fully decentralised alternatives of bitcoin et al. , but certainly not centralised , so a valid claim . Second , and perhaps primarily , by having a group of high-profile businesses as Libra members it goes some way towards sugarcoating this disruption in the eyes of the world ’ s regulators , in readiness for the inevitable pushback . Many of the departing members – most being payments firms – stood to lose much of their core business if Libra becomes successful . So , in the face of the project facing additional scrutiny , Libra quickly became a net negative prospect for them and a respectful early withdrawal is entirely rational . But their places are likely to soon be taken up by other prospective members waiting in the wings . There are many companies that will want to capitalise on what could be a revolutionary global money system . Total membership is likely to be expanded as a show of strength . Ben Maurer , Facebook ’ s blockchain technology lead , that , “ over time , [ Libra ] is designed to transition the node membership from these founding members , who have a stake in the creation of the ecosystem , to people who hold Libra and have a stake in the ecosystem as a whole ” . Read more : Facebook has already announced that some . So turning up the dial of decentralisation is the intended objective – publicly , at least . This will help assuage the concerns of regulators that Facebook holds too much power over the new cryptocurrency . The fight is on The fight . What is at stake is the ability to extract value from the minting of new currency , . The stakes couldn ’ t be higher . The Bank of International Settlements ( the bank for central banks ) estimates that total global money is approximately US $ 5 trillion , while the CIA put that figure closer to US $ 80 trillion in 2017 , if . In comparison , the market capitalisation of all cryptocurrencies at the time of writing , some 372 times smaller than this latter estimate of total money . Facebook has the reach and the technology to make its cryptocurrency mainstream , but nation states have the regulatory power of veto to retain their monopolistic hold over monetary policy . Presently , their strategy is to spook any potential Libra partners to abandon the project . For example , US senators Sherrod Brown and Brian Schatz to the CEOs of Visa , Mastercard and Stripe saying any Libra members should expect a higher level of scrutiny not just of this project but also of their core business , too . Read more : But this pressure will only work with some companies – particularly more traditional financial firms that will ultimately lose out to Libra . The goals of the Libra project are big . If Facebook wanted to simply make some extra profits , it could have issued a voucher system , akin to a supermarket reward scheme . See Facebook ’ s previous attempt at issuing Facebook Credits . This would probably have avoided the regulatory scrutiny it has received with the Libra project and would be well-placed to take off . If Facebook simply charged users for tokens used to play games or purchase content within its applications , then regulators may have been less interested . After all , what is the real difference between purchasing Facebook credit with domestic currency to , say , purchasing credit from Vodafone to top up a prepay phone ? But the Libra project is more than this . Its aim is not to create a voucher system for internal use – it is not even to create a rival to a national currency – it is to create a global currency more similar to the euro than the US dollar , to service the under-banked and unbanked as well as threaten the dominance of existing fiat currencies in established markets . The Libra Association provides this possibility because it gives the project clout and legitimacy in front of regulators . It may even be that the financial regulators will in time feel a missed opportunity in not supporting the Libra project further . Cryptocurrencies , and corporate cryptocurrencies especially , continue to evolve and innovate . A challenger currency like Libra , with a transparent operating structure , the involvement of traditional financial firms and a recognisable , if currently bespoke monetary mechanism , could soon be seen as the lesser of forthcoming monetary evils in the form of truly decentralised globally relevant cryptocurrencies . If that is the case , expect a renewed clamour for a seat at the Libra Association table . Major players in global electronic payments are shying away from Libra , spooked by the scrutiny Facebook ’ s operations are attracting from regulators around the world . Libra isn ’ t dead yet – the killer blow will come from governments issuing their own digital currencies October 25 , 2019 5.26am BST UNSW Author Associate Professor of Finance , Scientia Fellow , UNSW Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Barely six months after Facebook announced its own digital currency , a plan heralded as the beginning of the end for central banks and government controls over the money supply , the whole thing is looking like a house of cards . The project , named Libra , was taken seriously in part because it had the support of major players in global electronic payments , including Visa , Mastercard , Paypal and Stripe . But now they are dropping like flies . Two weeks ago pulled out , followed by , as well as eBay , Mercado Pago ( Latin America ’ s most popular e-commerce platform ) and Booking Holdings ( owner of travel booking websites including booking.com ) . They appear to be spooked by the scrutiny Facebook ’ s operations are attracting from regulators around the world . Backlash European leaders are threatening to do all they can to thwart the Libra plan . France ’ s minister for the economy , Bruno Le Maire , said his government would not allow a private company “ ” and would join with Italy and Germany “ to show clearly that Libra is unwelcome in Europe ” . Does it mean Libra is dead on arrival ? Not necessarily . The companies backing away from it might change tack again . Visa , for example , has said . Others have signalled the same . What it does means is that governments wanting to mitigate the threat from platforms such as Libra are probably going to have to do more . The stage is set for central banks seeking to pull the rug from under Libra by issuing their own digital currencies . What ’ s got governments worried Right now , unless you use a cryptocurrency like Bitcoin , any transaction you make involves a central-bank-issued currency . It doesn ’ t matter if you never touch cash . Even if you pay for everything electronically , it involves technical transfers of government-backed cash , overseen by banks . Libra ’ s plan would have made it possible to buy ( and sell ) things without ever using a national currency . Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies showed this was possible , but they lacked the stability of government-backed currencies – their value fluctuated enormously . Read more : Libra promised to overcome that by being a “ stablecoin ” . It ’ d be pretty steady . That ’ s what made people take notice of it , and made governments concerned . If it caught on , governments could lose control of money . They might lose revenue from consumption taxes . They ’ d find it harder to fight crime . Their best defence is getting in first It ’ s why the two global agencies , the and the , have called digital currencies like Libra a major threat to anti money laundering efforts and financial stability . The initial enthusiasm for Libra , both from key players in the electronic transactions and the public , shows there is demand for something that cuts out the middlemen . If Libra fails , that threat won ’ t vanish . It will simply be postponed . So governments are now considering developing their own central bank issued digital currencies . In the United States two members of the US House of Representatives ( one a Republican , the other a Democrat ) have written to Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell : We are concerned that the primacy of the US Dollar could be in long-term jeopardy from wide adoption of digital fiat [ government created ] currencies . Internationally , the Bank for International Settlements conducted a study that found that over 40 countries around the world have currently developed or are looking into developing a digital currency . How would a central bank-issued digital currency differ from the electronic money we use now every time we transfer something from one bank to another ? It would be issued directly to the public and would not be linked to paper money at all . Transactions with it would not need to involve a bank . But the supply of it would be in the hands of governments . They ’ d get in first . Gaining currency ? More than 1,000 cryptocurrencies have already failed – here ’ s what will affect successes in future November 21 , 2019 1.47pm GMT Manchester Metropolitan University Authors Senior Lecturer , Finance , Manchester Metropolitan University Research Fellow in Economics , Manchester Metropolitan University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Many cryptocurrencies have been launched in the past few years , often to great fanfare and celebration , only to fade and fail as the public and investors shun them . Coinopsy , which tracks such failures , there are some 1,085 dead coins at the time of writing . That ’ s a substantial number , the approximately 3,000 still in existence , and senior industry figures many of those to fail , too . Why do so many of these projects unravel ? You expect many initiatives to come and go in a fledgling market , of course – the 1990s is the perfect example . But at the same time , cryptocurrency developers have traditionally spent too little time designing the business-use case for their coins and tokens , then only realising after the launch that their idea is yesterday ’ s news . Time and again , we see launches that copy a previously successful coin – “ coin x is the new Bitcoin ” , for example . Yet the market already has Bitcoin , and it continues to be in demand – as evidenced by the 18 millionth Bitcoin only last month . We tend to overlook this problem with developers , even while we rightly criticise regulators for not being able to keep up with the fast evolution of the crypto market – despite efforts such as by US regulator the SEC , which was a fake new coin offering to teach investors about the risks of putting money into crypto . No doubt these kinds of developer errors will continue . Here are several other themes that we think will have a bearing on future crypto failures : 1 . Big Finance has arrived Eleven years ago , the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto quietly revolutionised money with the release of his or her now famous that outlined Bitcoin . In the early years after this vision took off , many of those who launched altcoins and tokens were small teams of developers and leftfield entrepreneurs . They had a clear mission to bring the world of traditional finance and central banks to its knees with decentralised units of exchange that were beyond anyone ’ s control . A few years on , these bank killers have largely been assimilated by the big financial institutions they once sought to challenge . Wall Street is taking of the crypto action , professionalising trading with the likes of derivatives and futures products . We may now be entering a phase where only large institutions will be able to generate profit from cryptocurrency design . It seems increasingly likely that the next revolutionary white paper will be generated by a global multi-billion-dollar firm – an ironic full turn of events , to say the least . Many other cryptocurrencies from more humble beginnings will fail in future , simply because they don ’ t have the resources to compete with these huge institutions . They will be driven by sunk costs and the crypto dream to dominate the future of money , but in many cases it won ’ t be enough . 2 . The future is stable For a cryptocurrency to be successful , two things need to happen : there has to be a reason why people want to use it , and they have to trust it . People will generally trust a coin or token thanks to the underpinning , the decentralised cryptographic ledger systems on which this industry is built . This means that the basis upon which the market judges if a new launch will stand or fall is mainly its use case . There are now altcoins in existence offering everything from new ways to to units of exchange in the . But more generally , in a world in which it is no longer enough to simply claim to have launched a better Bitcoin , the market ’ s attention has pivoted towards . Stablecoins are cryptocurrencies that are designed to avoid the wild volatility of cousins like Bitcoin by being pegged or backed by assets like traditional currencies or precious metals . They are designed to encourage people to use cryptocurrency for everyday buying and selling , while also offering a stable store of value for traders on the many crypto exchanges that don ’ t deal in traditional currencies . Examples include and , both of which are equivalent to US $ 1 . The fact that it takes considerable financial resources and infrastructure to make such coins operational is again likely to favour large institutions – witness Facebook ’ s to launch the Libra stablecoin , for instance . 3 . Losses more foul than fair Many investors have lost money through scams in the crypto world . One recent notorious example is the alleged , in which investors were promised guaranteed 300 % returns for investing Bitcoin or US dollars with a Nevada-based outfit . The money was supposed to be ploughed into foreign exchange options and altcoins , but was allegedly instead used to pay off other investors in the scheme . Fortune magazine that OneCoin may have generated losses in excess of the US $ 19.4 billion ( £15 billion ) racked up by in 2008 . Somewhat different was , an exchange in which investors could swap Bitcoin for Bitconnect coins , which would be lent out with claimed returns of up to 120 % per year . After longstanding ponzi accusations , the US authorities stepped in last year and the exchange . Bitconnect coins plunged 96 % in value , creating huge losses , though they still exist and trade today . An alternative problem is hackers raiding exchanges . The most infamous example is the of 2014 , in which over 850,000 bitcoins were stolen and never recovered . More recently the Binance exchange , one of the world ’ s largest , hacked several times , costing investors tens of millions of dollars . One other was that of Gerald Cotten , the 30-year-old founder of Canadian cryptocurrency exchange Quadriga , who died a year ago . Because nobody had access to his passwords , the investments of 115,000 customers worth US $ 137m were unrecoverable . When a court-appointed auditor was eventually able to access his account , it turned out the assets had all been sold months before Cotten died . We fully expect these sorts of problems to continue – and this shouldn ’ t be surprising . We are talking about a toxic combination of anonymous technology that is largely unregulated , poorly understood , and cheap and easy to move around the world – and many people willing to kiss frogs in their search for a lucrative prince .

